---
layout: page
section: introduction
issue: 7
order: 0
date: May 2023
title: "Why do this digital?"
doi: ""
author: 
- name: Kaiama L. Glover
  shortname: Glover
  bio: >
    [Kaiama L. Glover](https://barnard.edu/profiles/kaiama-l-glover) is Associate Professor of French and Africana Studies at Barnard College, Columbia University. She is the author of [Haiti Unbound: A Spiralist Challenge to the Postcolonial Canon](http://liverpooluniversitypress.co.uk/products/61903) (Liverpool UP 2010), first editor of [Marie Vieux Chauvet: Paradoxes of the Postcolonial Feminine](http://yalebooks.com/book/9780300214192/yale-french-studies-number-128) (Yale French Studies 2016), and translator of Frankétienne's *Ready to Burst* (Archipelago Books 2014). She has received awards and fellowships from the National Endowment for the Humanities, the Mellon Foundation, and the Fulbright Foundation. Current projects include forthcoming translations of Marie Vieux Chauvet's *Dance on the Volcano* (Archipelago Books) and René Depestre's *Hadriana in All My Dreams* (Akashic Books), and the multimedia platform *In the Same Boats: Toward an Afro-Atlantic Visual Cartography*.
- name: Alex Gil
  shortname: Gil
  bio: >
    [Alex Gil](http://www.elotroalex.com/) is Senior Lecturer II and Associate Research Faculty of Digital Humanities in the Department of Spanish and Portuguese at Yale University, where he teaches introductory and advanced courses in digital humanities, and runs project-based learning and collective research initiatives. His research interests include Caribbean culture and history, digital humanities and technology design for different infrastructural and socio-economic environments, and the ownership and material extent of the cultural and scholarly record. He is currently co-organizer of The Caribbean Digital annual conference, and co-principal investigator of the Caribbean Digital Scholarship Collective, funded by the Andrew W. Mellon foundation.
language: en
---


It seems as good a time as any to say---to ask---the quiet part out
loud. *Why do this digital*? It's the question that hums steady in the
background of all the work we welcome into our journal. It's the
question we ask ourselves, our collaborators, and our students at all
stages of the projects we take on. And it's the ground zero question for
the contributors to every issue of *archipelagos* we publish. There's no
need to rehash at too great length what anyone who has landed on this
page already knows: notably, that the digital is not salvation---that
it is as vulnerable to the hierarchies, bigotries, and biases of the
colonial order and its afterlives as are the analog spaces that so many
of us have long been working to upend. Given this---given that to
engage with the digital in the contexts of our research and teaching
requires us to navigate not only the landmines of modern history, but
also those presented by tools and technologies that are changing at an
unprecedentedly breathless pace---we must always be asking: what do we
get for our digital trouble?

Humanists before all else, we would venture to say that the "get" is
more questions---old ones asked and answered in new ways, new ones
surfaced through the ones and zeros of our code. We take nothing for
granted in our digital praxis, and our seventh issue makes that premise
explicit. The work featured here enjoins us to embrace a Black Digital
Practice that is, as our contributors Charlotte Sussman and Tye Landels
remind us, "invested in process rather than in product." Sussman and
Landels lay out the specific ways they have worked to craft small
stories from big data in their extraordinary cartographic project,
"Remembering the Middle Passage." Working with technology that invites
the amassing and comprehending of information on the most sweeping of
scales, Sussman and Landels propose, almost counterintuitively, that we
narrow our focus. Their work is an eloquent and compelling call to
"disaggregate," to "remix," and to "remediate" the grand narratives
produced by the increasingly massive stores of information at our
disposal. Faced with the vast expanse of the data forest, they aim to
bring not just the trees, but individual branches, into better view.

The work of making colonial tools engender different stories and chart
otherwise journeys is, ultimately, a refusal of comprehension as
capture. This practice of fugitivity animates Isabel Bradley's two
contributions to this issue---a descriptive process essay and project
peer review of the *Monograph of Haiti Map*. Developed in collaboration
with historian Laurent Dubois and geographer Nicolas Scheffer, this
cartographic project aims to refashion (to remix, to remediate) aerial
maps of Haiti generated by the US marines during their nearly
twenty-year occupation of the country. As they repurpose imperial
instruments designed for the surveillance and control of Haitian bodies
and territories, Bradley, Dubois, and Scheffer work to resignify and
render opaque spaces that US Empire sought, and literally fought, to
make transparent. As is evidenced in her careful relating of the
project's conceptualization and execution, their digital remapping
deploys today's technologies to undermine technologies of the past,
denying the map's original intentions and pointing toward fugitive
pathways that never were nor could be fully
captured/comprehended/apprehended by colonial power.

Neither Sussman and Landels nor Bradley and her team are kidding
themselves, of course. They are well aware that attempting to redeem the
proverbial master's tools or to turn those tools to disorderly use
always risks backfiring. Sarah Juliet Lauro and Kris Singh address this
danger in their examinations, respectively, of gaming technology and
social media. Both contributors query the domain of the ludic and, as
such, are compelled to consider the fundamental *appropriateness* of
playing in and with technologies of amusement that more and less
directly implicate the traumas of the Caribbean past and present.
Lauro's "close-playing" of two slavery video-games is an exemplary
instance of what it means to infuse technological experiences with
rigorous humanist inquiry. She asks---and answers, ultimately, in the
affirmative---whether "playing" enslavement can be anything other than
problematic. Implicating Glissantian opacity, as is so often our
Caribbeanist wont, Lauro suggests that the frustrations and obstacles of
the game-play serve a mimetic purpose. The gamer is made to confront the
impossibility of fully escaping bondage within a totalizing
(colonial-cum-technological) system designed for domination and
constraint.

Singh, for his part, is less sold on the pedagogical value of
alternative media when it comes to Caribbean fugitivity. He asks---and
answers, ultimately, in the negative---whether the showcasing of
Caribbean speech patterns on platforms like TikTok de facto facilitates
decolonial relationships and practices. He is concerned that
social-cum-capital preoccupations encourage creators to trade irony for
"funniness," diminishing the legibility of Caribbean subjects' material
problems---the wrong sort of opacity, as it were. Can we, he asks, even
really speak of opacity or decoloniality within the consumerist,
surveillance-based algorithmic economy of social media? Unconvinced of
such a possibility, Singh turns to what he argues is the more grounded,
analog space of Andrew Salkey's illustrated novel *Hurricane* as an
exemplar of a constructively mediated Caribbean vernacular.

Storms are at the center of Elise Foote, Winnie E. Pérez Martínez, and
Charlotte Rogers's digital exhibition *Coasts in Crisis: Caribbean Arts
and Cultures after Hurricanes*, featured in the "Digital Projects"
section of this issue. *Coasts in Crisis* proposes a mediation of
disaster through the vernacular of visual art, poetry, and music by
artists who experienced Hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017. Explicit
connections between art and social justice activism, fostered across
national borders, are made possible by digital mediation: spiralic
Caribbean geographies become epistemic frames; form and content are
placed in provocative dialogue; art is made accessible beyond the
confines of conventional museum and gallery spaces; technology is
thoughtfully mobilized to create and sustain "IRL" community. Similarly,
Alexandra P. Gelbard's *Cabildo de Regla Digital Archive* is a project
immersed in the Caribbean real. Stepping into the space of cultural
preservation, in close collaboration with a specific group of Cuban
community organizers and practitioners of the Lucumí religion, Gelbard's
project documents, curates, and amplifies localized responses to
powerful forces that determine the material realities of Caribbean
subjecthood. The project presents a digital archival practice of memory
and knowledge transmission that has emerged from and serves a community
struggling for legibility on its own terms.

So, why do these things digital? To answer that question, the people and
projects featured in these pages focus expressly on the how. They
proceed cautiously, never presuming an inherent decolonial praxis
without ascertaining, with maximal clarity, the intention of creators,
the context of creation, and the reception of consumer-users. They begin
with the premise that redemption and resistance are elusive when it
comes to representing our Caribbean through the prism of technology.
This does not stop them from trying to understand why that is the case,
or dreaming up new freedom architectures around the impasses. For our
authors and teams, the digital is not beyond interpretation, because
ultimately it is not disconnected from our struggles for justice and
joy. Neither is the digital a conquering armada from Silicon Valley that
we simply accept as if it were the force of gravity. To the contrary,
the digital continues to be, for them and for us, a key strategic
terrain where our historically-conscious, critically-minded, and
theoretically-inflected hermeneutics have the potential to transmute the
very object of our study, and with it our all too real fates. Our
digital will be humanist or will not be at all.

Onward,   
Kaiama and Alex   
Editors
