---
layout: article
section: articles
title: 
  "long": "A Close-Playing: The Videogames of Patrick Chamoiseau"
  "short": "A Close-Playing"
doi: "10.7916/archipelagos-0703"
author: 
- name: Sarah Juliet Lauro
  shortname: Lauro
  bio: >
    Sarah Juliet Lauro is associate professor of hemispheric literature at the University of Tampa. She is the author and editor of many works that address the folkloric figure of the living dead zombie in literature and film, including the article "A Zombie Manifesto" (boundary2, 2011) and the monograph *The Transatlantic Zombie: Slavery, Rebellion, and Living Death* (Rutgers UP, 2015). Her next book project turns from zombies as a figuration of slavery and slave revolt, which is her central interest in the myth, to commemorations of slave rebellion in literature, art, film, and digital culture. On this topic she published *Kill the Overseer! The Gamification of Slave Resistance* with the University of Minnesota Press (2020), which is about slave rebellion in videogames, as well as recent articles in *TDR: The Drama Review* and *History of the Present*. 
date: May 2023
issue: 7
order: 3
abstract: >
    In his many works, Martinican author Patrick Chamoiseau wrestles with Caribbean identity, colonial influence, the complexity of blackness, and the history of slavery. Best known for his Prix Goncourt winning novel *Texaco* (1992), Chamoiseau is considered a major voice in francophone literature, contributing significantly to the literature of the African diaspora and its self-definition. His works disrupt expectations of genre and form: *Texaco*, for example, braids together disparate kinds of narrative (journal entries, letters) and cultural references (historic incidents and spiritual concepts). This attitude to the polyvalence of storytelling may have led to Chamoiseau''s work in another narratological form, the field of videogames. He is credited on two titles both produced by Cocktel Vision: *Freedom: Rebels in Darkness*, an 8-bit game produced in 1988, and *Méwilo*, a 1987 first-person point and click adventure game, which like *Texaco*, dramatizes the 1902 volcano eruption that destroyed Saint Pierre. *Freedom: Rebels in Darkness* combines the adventure game (and even some Street Fighter-like button mashing) with the intense historical reality of slave resistance. *Méwilo* is a detective game where the playable character must solve a mystery about a paranormal haunting with its roots in the 1831 slave revolt. This paper offers a reading of these two games alongside several of Chamoiseau''s literary offerings and the broader theory espoused in his work in order to analyze these texts as commemorations of slave resistance that make use of a strategy of opacity evident in much of Chamoiseau''s work. This article comes out of a piece I was writing on "Creolizing videogames," and I think of these two articles as sisters. Here, I offer a close-playing of the games, and my goal is to introduce these understudied texts to those who might want to play them. In this medium, I can share screencaps and videos of my gameplay. 
  
abstract_fr: >
    Dans ses nombreux ouvrages, l'auteur martiniquais Patrick Chamoiseau se débat avec l'identité caribéenne, l'influence coloniale, la complexité de la noirceur et l'histoire de l'esclavage. Mieux connu pour son roman *Texaco* (1992), lauréat du Prix Goncourt, Chamoiseau est considéré comme une voix majeure de la littérature francophone, contribuant de manière significative à la littérature de la diaspora africaine et à son autodéfinition. Ses œuvres bouleversent les attentes de genre et de forme : *Texaco*, par exemple, tresse ensemble des types disparates de récits (entrées de journal, lettres) et de références culturelles (incidents historiques et concepts spirituels). Cette attitude face à la polyvalence de la narration a pu amener le travail de Chamoiseau à une autre forme narratologique, le domaine du jeu vidéo. Il est crédité sur deux titres tous deux produits par Cocktel Vision : Freedom : Rebels in Darkness, un jeu 8 bits produit en 1988, et Méwilo, un jeu d'aventure pointer-cliquer à la première personne de 1987, qui comme *Texaco*, dramatise l'éruption du volcan de 1902, qui a détruit Saint Pierre. Freedom : Rebels in Darkness combine le jeu d'aventure (et même un écrasement de boutons à la Street Fighter) avec l'intense réalité historique de la résistance des esclaves. Méwilo est un jeu de détective où le personnage jouable doit résoudre un mystère sur une hantise paranormale ayant ses racines dans la révolte des esclaves de 1831. Cet article propose une lecture de ces deux jeux aux côtés de plusieurs propositions littéraires de Chamoiseau et de la théorie plus large adoptée dans son travail afin d'analyser ces textes comme des commémorations de la résistance des esclaves qui utilisent une stratégie d'opacité évidente dans une grande partie de l'œuvre de Chamoiseau. Cet article est issu de mon article « Créoliser les jeux vidéo », et je considère ces deux articles comme complémentaires. Ici, je propose une lecture approfondie des jeux, et mon objectif est de présenter ces textes sous-étudiés à ceux qui pourraient vouloir les jouer. Sur ce support, je peux partager des captures d'écran et des vidéos de mon gameplay.
    
abstract_es: >
    En sus muchas obras, el autor martiniqués Patrick Chamoiseau lucha con la identidad caribeña, la influencia colonial, la complejidad de la negrura y la historia de la esclavitud. Mejor conocido por su novela *Texaco* (1992), ganadora del Prix Goncourt, Chamoiseau es considerado una voz importante en la literatura francófona, contribuyendo significativamente a la literatura de la diáspora africana y su autodefinición. Sus obras trastocan las expectativas de género y forma: *Texaco*, por ejemplo, entreteje tipos dispares de narrativa (entradas de diario, cartas) y referencias culturales (incidentes históricos y conceptos espirituales). Esta actitud ante la polivalencia de la narración puede haber llevado al trabajo de Chamoiseau a otra forma narratológica, el campo de los videojuegos. Se le atribuyen dos títulos, ambos producidos por Cocktel Vision: Freedom: Rebels in Darkness, un juego de 8 bits producido en 1988, y Méwilo, un juego de aventura point and click en primera persona de 1987, que al igual que *Texaco*, dramatiza la erupción del volcán de 1902. que destruyó Saint Pierre. Freedom: Rebels in Darkness combina el juego de aventuras (e incluso un toque de botones al estilo Street Fighter) con la intensa realidad histórica de la resistencia de los esclavos. Méwilo es un juego de detectives en el que el personaje jugable debe resolver un misterio sobre un fantasma paranormal que tiene sus raíces en la revuelta de esclavos de 1831. Este artículo ofrece una lectura de estos dos juegos junto con varias de las ofertas literarias de Chamoiseau y la teoría más amplia propugnada en su obra para analizar estos textos como conmemoraciones de la resistencia de los esclavos que hacen uso de una estrategia de opacidad evidente en gran parte de la obra de Chamoiseau. Este artículo surge de un artículo que estaba escribiendo sobre "Criolizar los videojuegos", y pienso en estos dos artículos como hermanos. Aquí, ofrezco una interpretación cercana de los juegos, y mi objetivo es presentar estos textos poco estudiados a aquellos que quieran jugarlos. En este medio, puedo compartir capturas de pantalla y videos de mi juego.
   
language: en
pdf: true
---

## Part I. Introduction.

A "close-playing," for those unfamiliar with the term, is like a
close-reading of a literary text, but for videogames; it is a term
coined by Edmond Chang, comprising analysis of the game's "intersection
of form, function, meaning, and action."[^1] Just as performing a
close-reading requires paying particular attention to the way form works
in tandem with the content (in a poem this may mean scrutinizing
enjambment, line length, eye-rhyme, etc.) a close-*playing* pays special
attention to the ludic operations of the game---the game mechanics---
for the part they play in enhancing the narrative. What are we going to
be close-playing?

The famed author Patrick Chamoiseau had a role in scripting aspects of
two videogames, *Méwilo* (Coktel 1987) and *Freedom: Les guerriers de
l'ombre* (Coktel 1988), to which we will turn our attention directly.
But I want to emphasize from the start that these games were produced by
Muriel Tramis, a notable Black woman video game designer from
Martinique. Given the accusations of misogyny with which Chamoiseau's
*Éloge de la creolité* (co-authored with Jean Bernabé and Raphael
Confiant) was met, I want to make sure that we begin by acknowledging
her work, even though this essay focuses on Chamoiseau's contributions
to the written scripts.[^2] Tramis's body of work includes "les jeux
Adi" (*Accompagnement Didacticiel Intelligent*), early childhood
education games well-known to French school children, and the infamous
sexual adventure game *Emmanuelle* (Coktel 1989).[^3] Recent interviews
that Tramis has given might suggest that she would object to sharing
equal credit for these labors.[^4] I want to provide more than a
sidelong glance at Tramis, inasmuch as her work provides a way of
introducing some of the key themes discussed in the gamic narratives.

Muriel Tramis was the first female game designer to be awarded France's
Legion of Honor in 2018. In the wake of Gamergate and increased
attention to gender in videogame studies---and one also might suggest,
in the era of Black Lives Matter, the 1619 project, and a broader moment
highlighting legacies of slavery---Tramis's work has garnered some
interest even in Anglophone games journalism and scholarship. In the
2020 article "Une vie bien jouée/A Life Well Played: The Cultural Legacy
of Games Designer Muriel Tramis," Alenda Chang compares Tramis to
"France's own Roberta Williams."[^5]

The greater attention paid to Tramis also might be a function of the
retrogaming trend, wherein old games enjoy reinvigorated popularity due
to the internet. Tramis had been on my radar since Maddi Chilton
published an article in *Killscreen* titled, "A Forgotten, Decades-old
Game about Slavery has returned."[^6] Chilton was right to note how
"ahead of its time" the game now feels, writing that the creation of
*Freedom*, "a game by an Afro-Caribbean woman about a violent slave
revolt on the plantations of Martinique," at the birth of mainstream
videogame culture, "is frightening in its honesty."[^7] Since 2016, two
books have emerged that take on the subject of videogames about slave
revolt: Alyssa Sepinwall's exhaustive study, *Slave Revolt on Screen:
The Haitian Revolution in Film and Videogames*[^8], and my thin volume
for the University of Minnesota's Forerunner series, *Kill the Overseer!
The Gamification of Slave Resistance* (2020). The theme of slave
rebellion is at the heart of both of these games upon which Chamoiseau
worked, the aforementioned *Méwilo* (1987) and *Freedom: les guerriers
de l'ombre* (1988) both produced by Coktel Vision. Part III of
Sepinwall's monograph is devoted to "Video Games on Slavery and the
Haitian Revolution," with chapter 8 addressing the Assassin's Creed
franchise and its depictions of Haiti and Haitian rebels and chapter 9
on Tramis's games about slavery. *Kill the Overseer! The Gamification of
Slave Resistance* (Lauro) focuses especially on games that make the
resistive slave a playable character, and it profiles Tramis's *Freedom:
les guerriers de l'ombre* briefly, among its discussion of educational
games made for use in the classroom, art games, and mainstream console
games.[^9] *Méwilo* describes the reverberations of an event that took
place during a slave revolt in Martinique, and *Freedom* makes a game of
attempted slave rebellion.

The games I am looking at here foreground Creole culture and folklore,
including mythical figures like *zombis* and *soucouyans* in *Méwilo*;
and, at least according to the game manual, the rebels in *Freedom* can
be aided by sorcerers and even a goddess.[^10] *Méwilo* is based on a
folktale about a slave master's buried gold that was previously featured
in Chamoiseau's novel *Chronique des sept misères* (1986), and which,
according to Renée Gossen, "symbolizes the wealth that the *békés*,
white French settlers and plantation owners, have wrongfully reaped from
a land which is not theirs and, quite literally, on the backs of African
slaves."[^11] Tramis explicitly mentions this as a long-standing myth in
her interview with Tristan Donovan in  *Replay: The History of Video
Games*: "The game was inspired by the Carib legend of jars of gold,"
explained Tramis. "At the height of the slave revolts, plantation
masters saved their gold in the worst way. They got their most faithful
slave to dig a hole and then killed and buried him with the gold in
order that the ghost of the unfortunate slave would keep the curious
away from the treasure."[^12]

I am interested here in thinking of these games as "Creole" not only in
their *content*---that is, by making reference to various aspects of the
Afro-Diasporic-Indigenous-European cultural stew that one finds in the
Caribbean and other sites of colonization--- but also in their *form,*
as by defying expectation, instructions, or genre boundaries. The word
"Creole" has a long history, signifying, first, both white persons of
European descent and enslaved persons born in the colonies; and later, a
population with mixed heritage; it can signify both language and
culture. I understand "creole" through Glissant's antillanité and
Chamoiseau, Confiant, and Bernabé's "créolité," as that which pushes
back against "false universalism, monolinguism and purity" (Éloge de la
créolité). For me, Creole defies rigid compartmentalization. Elsewhere I
have sought to articulate more specifically a new category of
"creolizing videogames," that reference oral culture and folklore even
as they exercise a kind of Creole modality in their multisensory forms,
linguistic play, defiance of genre, emphasis upon collective
subjectivities, and more (in Russworm and Murray). I am especially
interested in creolizing as a hermeneutic process, as in the series
Creolizing the Canon put forth by the Caribbean Philosophical
Association. Lastly, I want to emphasize here that Chamoiseau, Confiant,
and Bernabé insist that the concept of créolité "is not limited to the
American continent ... \[but\] refers to the brutal interaction, on
either insular or landlocked territories \[...\] of culturally different
populations"[^13] and thus invites broad application. The sense in which
I use it here stresses a willful defiance of monolithic categories, as
in recent efforts to creolize the canon.[^14] At the nexus of form and
content, we might consider the ways that digital games can remap written
archives (as by referencing oral narratives).

One goal of this essay is to emphasize that the archive of a people's
oral history, which we find in song, literature, and folklore, may also
sometimes turn up in unexpected media, like videogames. Tramis stated
this intention in an interview with game blogger Ilmari:

> \[T\]he dictatorship of sugar has caused an imbalance in the
> environment and human relations of \[the Caribbean\] region, and the
> Creole society still bears the aftermath. I felt a great emptiness on
> the side of our myths and founding legends, on the side of our
> history, unknown or suffocated under a bundle of shame. I wanted to
> extend the Creolity \[sic\] movement to video games too.[^15] 

It is an important intervention to emphasize the créolité of videogames, and most of the articles on Tramis's games about slavery speak of it as *testimony*.[^16] "Fugitive slaves, my ancestors, were true warriors that I had to pay tribute to... It was *my duty to remember*."[^17] A videogame can, if not *overcome*, at least draw attention to, the elisions of the historical archive. Sepinwall reports in her interviews with Tramis that this was one of the designer's explicit goals: "Tramis sought to overcome *archival silences*; she wanted to bring enslaved people to life by drawing from community memory rather than documents left by colonists"[^18] (italics added). It is for this reason that her games turn to folklore for the political experiences, traumas, and victories of a people without ready access to ink and vellum, exploring oral histories as an alternative archive.[^19]

The insufficiency of the historical archive is a major point of
discussion in slavery studies. Many scholars have grappled with this
lack and how to fill it.[^20] The voices of those humans who were
considered property are rarely found among the holdings of libraries.
Just as *créolité,* as articulated by Bernabé, Chamoiseau, and Confiant
in their 1989 manifesto, rejected the colonial imposition of the French
and experimented with linguistic play, so do these games celebrate
Caribbean blackness and culture by looking to folklore and local
histories of resistance for inspiration. Further, this essay seeks to
articulate the way these games use a particular device that we associate
with Chamoiseau's literary œuvre, opacity. In brief, I argue that the
narrative complexity of these ludic texts raises a question about
whether or not the history of slavery (and resistance) ought to be made
*playable*. Extrapolating from Edouard Glissant's invocation of opacity
in theorizing identity, we can consider *opacity* as a literary and
artistic device that has broad application for establishing limits to
encroachment, cultural consumption, or the prurient interest of
outsiders.[^21] In terms of identity, opacity signifies "the survival of
diversity, of irreducible otherness ... an irreducible particularity,
the stubborn otherness of the Other.[^22] In artistic practice, opacity
might be a bulwark against exoticization, fetishization, othering. It
can be a tool of resistance. It may look like a narrative barricade
through which only certain readers can pass to a deeper level of
understanding, when, as with the use of an untranslated Creole
expression in the midst of a francophone passage, the text *selects* its
reader. It's a mode we see often employed across Chamoiseau's body of
work. I theorize that some uses of Glissantian opacity in the games
productively block this history from complete commercialization.

In the "Afterword" to her translation of *Chronique des sept misères*,
Linda Coverdale writes, "Chamoiseau is not fond of glossaries and
believes that the 'Creole dimension' of his work should be safeguarded
against the alienating ideal of 'transparency,'"[^23] but rather than
just using Creole, he is apt to create his own words, what one scholar
called his "Chamoisifying" of language.[^24] As he wrote in the
introduction to *Creole Tales*, "the storyteller must take care to use
language that is so opaque, so devious---its significance broken up into
a thousand sibylline fragments..." [^25] (italics in original). We might
go so far as to hazard that the collaborative process of reading is the
reassembly of these fragments into a picture, and that the participatory
nature of the videogame narrative only makes this more visible. With a
hat tip to Edouard Glissant, Chamoiseau continues, "the Storyteller's
object is almost *to obscure as he reveals*" (italics in original).[^26]

Opacity and creolization are of a piece: both work against unilateral
apprehension. Chamoiseau's œuvre is also creolized in form: it
challenges notions of authorship, genre, media, and language. The
author's diverse output includes screenplays, multimodal works, and
collaborations. For example, Chamoiseau's 1999 fable *Seven Dreams of
Elmira* is a collection of different versions of a folktale accompanied
by photo portraits of the tellers by Jean-Luc de Laguarigue. The text is
written from the perspective of an old worker at the Saint-Etienne Rum
Distillery, a man who tells us that he is over one hundred years old and
recounts the distillery's various mythologies. A note from the author
(signed P.C.) lists his informants, "commanders of memory," as his
sources for the various ideations of the folktale included therein.
Chamoiseau also penned a comic book---in Creole and in French---with
Georges Puisy, *Delgrès, Les Antilles sous Bonaparte*, about the
struggle against the reestablishment of slavery in Guadeloupe by
Napoleon. One aspect of creolized texts is a disruption of authorial
expectations. Inasmuch as they are inherently collaborative, videogames
are a ripe medium in which to stage conversations about collectivity and
identity, thus the form lends itself to being considered through the
lens of creolization.

That one of Caribbean literature's most notable authors collaborated on
the production of two videogames in the 1980s has been largely left
unconsidered by Chamoiseau scholars. This is especially surprising given
how the games echo (or foreshadow) his novels.[^27] Many of the major
elements of his work appear in these ludic texts: *Méwilo,* like his
novel *Texaco*, evokes the tragic eruption of Mont Pelée in 1902[^28]
and, like the novel *Solibo Magnifique*, features a detective trying to
solve a magical mystery.[^29] Similar to *Seven Dreams of Elmira*,
*Méwilo* stages some of its action in a haunted former plantation and,
as with *The Chronicle of the Seven Sorrows,* the game contains a tale
of buried treasure and the ghost (or *zombi)* of its enslaved
guardian.[^30] What's more, at least one scholar has referred to
Chamoiseau's use of creole folktales as "ludic," so one would think that
the literal games he designed would be of interest.[^31] I second Alyssa
Goldstein Sepinwall's surprise that major books on Chamoiseau fail to
address these videogames, given the diversity of the author's artistic
output and scholars' attention to it.[^32] The games are rich with
themes that we see across his wider œuvre ---slavery, colonialism,
language and folklore---but they are also exceedingly difficult to find
and to play successfully, which may account for their scholarly neglect.

I believe that frustrated interactivity (a concept in videogame studies)
reverberates with potential for Creole storytelling as a mechanism of
opacity.[^33] What does this look like, in practice? On the one hand, it
looks like games that include challenges that are not easily solved,
that incorporate uses of operational weakness and in-game frustration to
make a point about the subject matter. On the other, it may look like
games that are explicitly unwinnable. My own gameplay, described in the
pages that follow, consisted of much running into brick walls
(figuratively in these games, but elsewhere, literally). The gamic
obstructions concretize the mechanism of opacity, making the path
forward obscure, difficult, or unfun.

*Freedom* and *Méwilo* rely significantly on productive opacity. They
are difficult, if not altogether unwinnable. Their opacity evokes the
near-impossibility of resistance to the plantation machine, but on a
deeper level it may also protect this history from appropriation or even
amusement. As Coverdale has written, opacity can be "a mode of pushback
against cultural appropriation" ("Afterword" 128). The game mechanics
demand that the player work to understand Caribbean history. And even
then, the legacy of slave resistance may be beyond the player's control.

Part of what makes the videogame an ideal form in which to create
Creolizing texts is its inherent plurality: there is no one experience
of the game, just as creolizing texts emphasize collaborative
storytelling above individual authors.[^34] My experience of the gamic
text will be radically different from that of any other player, due to
all the permutations of play. As such, the experience of playing is one
of collaborative meaning-making between the player and the design(er/s).
My play of these games is as an outsider, non-Caribbean, a middle-aged
woman not very good at gaming, and making attempts to play in the years
2019-2021, in which the technology of the original games has become
obsolete. That is, because I do not have a functional Atari lying
around, I can only play these games through online emulators that come
themselves with a range of problems. All of this is part of *my*
experience of the game.[^35] Yours would no doubt be different.[^36] But
a question that arises is: Who are these games *for*? The French child
who had perhaps visited Martinique on holiday but knew little of its
history? Or the child of Caribbean ancestry who would recognize in the
games something of their own heritage? This essay will not try to answer
that question definitively, but instead will highlight, through the
presentation of my own gameplay, the ways that the gamic narratives
change depending on the player's lived personal experience. Leaning upon
my previous scholarship, I'll present here my own (perilous, difficult
and often failed) journey through the games.[^37]

## Part II. Unwinnable.

On the unwinnability of *Freedom*, game blogger Ilmari proffers several
options:

> Chances are:
>
> It's a bug
>
> It's an intended feature, meant to teach you cruelly that rebellion
> never pays
>
> There's something wrong with the copy I've been playing
>
> It's a clever copy protection that will fail you at the very last
> minute
>
> I\'ve still missed some implicit winning condition[^38]

It was a great relief to me to find these words, written by a more adept
gamer than myself; it means that it's not me and my poor gaming skills
that have resulted in me failing the game, over and over again. I have
played *Freedom: Les guerriers de* *l'ombre* in two different languages
and through two different platforms over a period of some years. I have
played as all four playable protagonists. I have tried tweaking the
settings, and (when the game system allowed me to do so) I have opted
for different skill levels and side-characters, using the manual's
descriptions to try to pick the weakest foes. And yet, I consistently
ended up mauled by dogs, captured, whipped, burned alive, cut up, my bones
broken with a hammer, with molten lead poured into my wounds.

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro1.png"
    title="Screencapture of a Game Over screen"
    caption="Fig. 1. Screencapture of a Game Over screen. (\"You are too weak and the master is invincible. You are quickly captured, whipped, and condemned to have your bones broken by the blows of a hammer and receive no sacrament.\")"
%}

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro2.png"
    title="Screencapture of a Game Over screen"
    caption="Fig. 2. Screencapture of a Game Over screen. (\"You are vanquished by your adversary. You are immediately captured, whipped, and condemned to have your arms and legs cut and in the wounds made by the pincers, to have molten lead poured.\")"
%}

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro3.png"
    title="Screencapture of a Game Over screen"
    caption="Fig. 3. Screencapture of a Game Over screen. (\"The fight wasn't fair. You don't possess the weapons of your adversary. You are immediately captured, whipped, and condemned to have your feet and legs burned and to be buried alive.\")"
%}


Yes, it's a ghastly game. It should be acknowledged that the manual
claims that the game is winnable: "*Le but à atteindre varie avec le
type de maître,"*[^39] and Sepinwall verified that a code for Victory
exists in the game files.[^40] The manual states that if you are playing
with Pommeraie as the master, for example, it is sufficient to kill all
the dogs and flee the plantation, having reduced his crops by 50% and
25% of his buildings. For Arnaud de Ronan, you must kill all the dogs
and flee after reducing his slaves by 75%, presumably by enlisting them
to join you. In both cases, the manual further states, killing the owner
of the plantation resets the game. He can be defeated only by
progressively weakening his personnel. The master cannot be killed. Make
of that what you will.

Ilmari has suggested that the unwinnability of these versions of the
game---which many of us now, 30 years after the game's original release,
must access via emulators---may be an ingenious copyright mechanism,
presumably meaning that the game is unwinnable only because the software
is not running on the original hardware. Regardless of the reason, I
personally have made very little headway. I will go into more detail
about my failures below, but I first want to suggest a possibility that
Ilmari has overlooked, and which I suggested as a larger strategy of
game design concerning "the gamification of slave resistance" in *Kill
the Overseer!*: the difficulty of the game may be intended not to teach
the player "cruelly that rebellion never pays," but to safeguard this
history from appropriation, to make sure that it eludes the grasp of the
gamer, to signify the sacredness of this history that ultimately should
not be reduced to an entertainment commodity. From our vantage point in
2021, as Ilmari suggests, it is very difficult to tell where the game's
planned difficulty ends, and technological obsolescence begins to have
an effect. The emulators are glitchy, and the manuals are hard to find
online, all of which we might think of as what Stephanie Boluk and
Patrick LeMieux call "metagaming," that is, belonging to the text's
totality. In the spirit of considering this totality, I have divided
this discussion of my own close-playing into two phases: pre-play set-up
(which remains part of the world of the gameplay) and in-game play.

*Pre-play set up.*

Some might say that the game *Freedom* begins with the title card, which
reads:

> Night is falling over the prosperous Grand Parnasse plantation. The
> slaves, under their supervisor's thumb, have left the carts of cane
> and gone back to their huts. Meanwhile, the owner sips his rum on the
> veranda and the director rubs his hands; the plantation makes a
> considerable profit. The accountant finishes his records; there are
> 200 casks of sugar piled up in the buildings. The supervisor is
> worried. The lashes of his whip are no longer enough to keep the
> rhythm in the fields. The wind of rebellion is blowing over the
> negroes' huts! But who would dare become the leader of a rebellion?
> (English version via Internet Archive)

Yet, it also might be argued that the game begins much earlier. The
material reality of the game is the technology that it runs on---and
different versions of the game will begin differently, with slightly
different loading screens, and different levels of graphics and
sound.[^41] Perhaps we might think of this like different editions of a
book, which may be prefaced by translator's notes or forewords, ragged
covers, or pristine ones, all of which contribute to one's experience. I
have used this analogy elsewhere to explain what videogames can do for
narrative: imagine encountering a book that refuses to be opened. For
those players struggling to find the right emulator upon which to run
the program, the game might feel as if it begins when (huzzah!) the
loading screen finally appears. In the various versions of the game,
this loading screen depicts a nearly naked human of ambiguous gender.
The person appears to be genuflecting, but then they break their chains
over their head. On Atari, the image is accompanied by drums and set
against a lush background featuring huts and fire, and in the lower bit
version, there is a simple purple sunset. But in both high- and
low-resolution versions, the invitation to gaze upon this naked
prostrate body causes discomfort---there is something vaguely
inappropriate about rendering this historical material *playable*---even
if the person's gesture is ultimately one of empowerment.

Regardless of whether the game is played via an emulator or on a
platform that allows the player to bypass downloading the game to play
online (such as DOSzone), the first true interface screen is a copyright
protection. First, the player is asked for a passcode, included with the
manual to eliminate piracy: this is a large sheet of color-coded boxes
to which the player gains access by telling the program the color of the
given box number (such as A123) on the rainbow-colored sheet. Even
without this code, the patient player can keep guessing among the
provided answers until they turn up the right one; but locating the
correct box is a dizzying proposition even with the code sheet. The
commercial aspect of the game, the fact that it was an entertainment
commodity made available for purchase, is thus the first thing the
player understands. Our entry into the game may entail a sense of unease,
as we begin to play a game about the commodification of human bodies
from within a capitalist system dependent on the legacy of transatlantic
slavery. It is only after the player has navigated to the correct color
option to bypass the copyright protection that the character selection
begins.

At the start, the player is given a choice as to which one of four
playable enslaved characters from the Grand Parnasse plantation they
want to incarnate---Solitude, Makandal, Delia, or Sechou---and whether
to play them as "Defiant," "Rebellious," or "Fanatical," which the
manual intimates (but doesn't specify) are akin to easy, medium, or hard
difficulty settings for gamers of disparate skill levels. As Sepinwall
emphasizes in her discussion of the game in *Slave Revolt on Screen*,
these characters are based on historical (or symbolic) freedom-fighters
from various places in the Caribbean, thereby making Grand Parnasse
representative of the whole region and its history.[^42]

In the easiest iteration, the game allows you to tinker with the skill
settings even further.

My desk is papered with sticky notes that read:

> "Defiant" Solitude: 76 fire-starting ability; 8 climbing; 16
> lock-picking

> "Rebellious" Solitude: 72 fire-starting ability; 8 climbing; 20
> lock-picking

> "Fanatical" Solitude: 76 fire-starting ability; 8 climbing; 16
> lock-picking

And so on, with variations for all four characters. Though some slight
difference might be noticeable in how many enslaved people agreed to
join me if I played as a character with high charisma (meaning their
persuasiveness in rallying non-playable characters to revolt), like
Solitude as opposed to Sechou, and I might be more likely to defeat a
weak enemy like Bonnetierre, who the manual says "se bat mal"[^43] as
opposed to the overseer Nelson, described as "brutal et sevère"[^44], on
the whole, I still found the game unwinnable. The selection of levels,
characteristics, and non-playable characters (NPCs) had little
discernable effect.[^45] The arbitrariness of the game mechanics
heightens the player's frustration in a way that echoes the unfairness
of the plantation system.

Further, it might even be said that the manual itself is untrustworthy.
The manual states that named characters like Afoukal (sharing the name
of the protagonist in Chamoiseau's novel *Chronicle of the Seven
Sorrows*) or Canope bring special skills to the team, if you can manage
to recruit them. Canope, for example, has the ability to poison dogs,
which is immensely helpful, as the dogs that rove the plantation often
send up the warning and can easily end your mission. Having played the
game countless times however, I have never managed to recruit one of
these named persons. In an exciting moment, I discovered an NPC in a
different place from where I usually encountered him; still, he declined
to join me. The manual also claims that the deity Manman Dlo may help a
player, but I never spotted her. If this untrustworthiness in the manual
were a purposeful orchestration on the game designers' part, it might be
read as an ingenious commentary on the injustice of slavery, but it is
more likely that, as Ilmari says, the game is exceptionally difficult,
especially from the vantage point of contemporary gamers accessing the
technology via the interface of glitchy emulators.[^46] All of this is
to say, whether this difficulty is the result of the techno-temporal
opacity or is endemic to the game as designed by Tramis is a moot
question: the opacity of the game is a part of the gamic text writ
large, and thus is fitting for a game about an attempted slave revolt.

### In-game play

The player of *Freedom* navigates a maze-like layout on the main screen,
being careful to avoid the dogs on patrol. The game was made in 1988, so
we are closer to Pac-Man level graphics than to the rich cinematics of
today's games: on the navigation screen, you are a blinking light moving
across the space, amongst the small boxes that represent the buildings.
Smaller boxes are the slave huts and larger ones are the various
storehouses (where you can choose to commit acts of sabotage, like
setting casks of sugar on fire) and other buildings, including the
residences of the overseers, the religious officials (one of whom is
Père Labat), and the masters.[^47] When you pilot your dot to a location
and select it, it brings up another scene in which you can decide to
explore your surroundings, commit acts of sabotage, set fires, encounter
adversaries, or try to convince other enslaved persons to join you.

There seems to be no mechanic for killing the dogs one encounters on the
plantation's map screen. Presumably, Canope could take them out of the
equation if you could stumble upon the algorithm that tempts him to join
you, but you can also face off with the dogs by encountering them in a
fight screen, which is by no means pretty to look at. Given the
centrality of dogs to the game mechanics, it is worthwhile to briefly
address Chamoiseau's novel *Esclave vieil homme et le molosse* (1997).
The novel tells the tale of a very old, enslaved man who flees his
plantation one day and struggles mightily to evade his master's
monstrous dog. The narrative comes to a head as the dog nearly drowns in
quicksand but is ultimately spared; and while the old man is injured and
dies, he finds a sacred AmerIndian stone, and something appears to
transpire between the man and the dog. At the end, the beast returns to
his master profoundly changed into a docile creature, and the dead man's
bones are seen laying by the stone, leading the author to conjure---or
to channel---this tale. There is a sudden shift from third person to
first person upon the discovery of the magic stone engraved by the
indigenous peoples of the island, and a sort of spiritual fusion between
man and beast occurs. The final chapter is narrated by the author
himself, who shares the events that led him to uncover this story and to
write the book.

The novel has many of the hallmarks of Chamoiseau's œuvre, including
made-up words ("eleventy-thousand," 36), genre-crashing, meta-moments
(such as the shift in perspective), references to folklore (diablesses,
4; mermaids, 19; zombies, 24, 84; living dead, 32; femmes-zombies, 40);
and the weaving together of the history of these "bitter lands of sugar"
(3) and the meaning-making produced by fantastical storytelling about
this painful history. On the surface level, *Freedom*'s horrible dogs
(witness them in action in the embedded clips below) call to mind
Chamoiseau's *molosse*. But on the level of aesthetics, the game's
mechanics, which obstruct and frustrate, also echo the techniques that
Chamoiseau espoused in his literary œuvre, particularly in his
preference for texts that defy genre and cross the threshold between
fiction and reality by blending the author into his characters.[^48] In
addition to the specific detail of the man-eating dog, a horrifying
aspect of the historical reality of the slave plantation, the videogame
presents an inscrutability that recalls the opacity of Chamoiseau's
literary works. In videogames more broadly, frustration becomes part of
the gameplay, and in the best cases, we can read this as the game's
productive opacity.[^49] But there are also moments when the limits
embedded in this game seem unproductive.

The most problematic aspect of *Freedom* is the fact that, although
there appear to be dozens of *cases nègres*[^50] on the plantation,
there are only two different graphic frames that reappear, over and
over. As the player navigates to each abode and selects it, a dialogue
box appears, allowing the player to try "recruiting" the person dwelling
therein. Sometimes the person is a fieldhand, sometimes a craftsman, and
sometimes a named character who, presumably, would bring special skills
to the revolt if ever they could be convinced to become an ally, as
outlined in the manual.

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro4.png"
    title="Screen captures from the English version of the game showing the face of a man"
    caption="Fig. 4. Screen capture from the English version of the game, played on DosZone."
%}

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro5.png"
    title="Screen captures from the English version of the game showing the face of man"
    caption="Fig. 5. Screen capture from the English version of the game, played on DosZone. Note that the same face is used though the man is clearly meant to indicate a different person, in a different part of the plantation."
%}

The same two male faces are used over and over for the unnamed fieldhand
and the craftsman, representing scores of anonymous enslaved persons.
Because there is no narrative to the game, it is very hard to feel as if
one is advancing---and this is complicated by the fact that the slaves'
houses seem to repeat themselves, so that even though, looking at the
map, it would seem as if there are hundreds of recruitable persons (and
the manual provides numbers---"Ils sont 204 répartis en 14 cases de 10
esclaves aux champs + 6 cases de 10 ouvriers petits chef + la case du
quimboiseur + la case du séancier + la case du leader + un
prisonnier")[^51]---in the actual gameplay the same two pictures of
slave huts (Fig. 4, 5) repeat infinitely. The fact that the same two
images of the slaves' quarters repeat gives the sense that these persons
are interchangeable. It might have been better, I humbly suggest, to use
a blank avatar like a silhouette, rather than two distinct faces to
represent a range of different persons. I realize that this is likely
due to the limitations of the technology (and especially to the memory
capacity of the 1980s gaming system), but the outcome is unfortunate:
the repetition of the same places and the same faces gives one the sense
of an indistinguishable horde of the enslaved, apart from the few named
characters, who are rarely encountered in your mission.

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro6.png"
    title="Screen captures from the English version of the game"
    caption="Fig. 6. Screen capture by the author from in-game play on the Hatari emulator: An option is given to kill or capture LaRochelle, the plantation veterinarian; my choice made little difference, I died immediately thereafter."
%}

Detection points (represented by the butterfly icon on the main
navigation screen) signify how dangerously close the player is coming to
failing the mission, and these diminish with each encounter one has with
other individuals, regardless of the outcome. The player's objective is
to try to convince others to join their cause, and yet points are lost
each time one visits the *cases nègres* to recruit others, whether the
attempt is successful or a failure. As such, sometimes I lasted the
longest (in terms of game-playing time) when I made no attempt to rally
anyone, but instead merely meandered about, committing acts of damage to
the plantation's various buildings. This is an important aspect of the
game's construction because it speaks to the historical reality of slave
resistance and to the difficulty of increasing one's chances of
successful revolt by taking on numbers: risk is heightened with each
person with whom the plan is shared. As such, the game avoids a
potential pitfall: more efforts to recruit result in a loss to one's
detection points, but this avoids the sense of running about
"collecting" enslaved persons.[^52]

Because the game is not stacked in levels, the player can directly
encounter the plantation master, albeit to disastrous effect. Otherwise,
they can continue traveling through the landscape, avoiding the
man-eating dogs, encountering the same two images of slave huts over and
over, and occasionally finding a new enemy to face in hand-to-hand
combat or a set of buildings to ransack and destroy. Although one's
points diminish more slowly the less the player avoids committing acts
of senseless damage (for example, burning down only those buildings that
contain things of value, like the stores of sugar), it is arguably more
fun to run around the plantation setting everything on fire.

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro-vid1.png"
    title="Gameplay from DosZone for Freedom: Rebels in the Darkness, English version."
    caption="Clip 1. Gameplay from DosZone for Freedom: Rebels in the Darkness, English version."
    url="https://youtu.be/yn0-NjEsXt8"
    %}

In summation, *Freedom: les guerriers dans l'ombre* is essentially a
slave revolt sandbox game. I am not convinced that it can be won, given
my own experience with the game and having read others' critiques of
it.[^53] Admittedly, I am a poor gamer: after countless attempts, I have
yet to figure out what the climbing function is for, though it is
counted as one of the chief skillsets to be valued among the four
playable character options. A game designer might say that the
architecture of the game is simply inferior to that of *Méwilo*, to
which we will turn in the next section, though contemporary reviews were
mixed.[^54] For example, there is no cursor that returns the player to a
specific spot on the map in *Freedom*, whereas navigating the
hummingbird to the hibiscus flower in the bottom left corner of the
screen in *Méwilo* allows the player to zoom back out to the map. It is
impossible to determine with certainty what is due to temporal opacity
(the difficulty of accessing the technology), what is the result of my
own poor gaming skills, what is planned obfuscation, and even whether
the game's manual is a trustworthy document.

Nonetheless, the inscrutability of *Freedom* is not unlike Chamoiseau's
own literary inscrutability and, further, this inscrutability befits a
game about slave resistance. In *Kill the Overseer!* I discussed how
scholar and video game designer Ian Bogost's concepts, "selective
interactivity" and "operationalized weakness," are useful to addressing
the history of slave rebellion.[^55] I will confess, though, that
*Freedom* can just feel frustrating in an unproductive manner.

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro-vid2.png"
    title="Gameplay from DosZone for Freedom: Rebels in the Darkness, English version."
    caption="Clip 2. I've provided some longer clips here from my gameplay
because playthroughs online are so limited. In the one above, from
DOSZONE, you can actually see a glitch occur."
    url="https://youtu.be/Tthhskq6m9M"
    %}

*Freedom*'s chaos and futility, at once in those aspects crafted by
Chamoiseau, those designed by Tramis, and those that result from vintage
gaming, are all part of the game text's totality. In their combination
they not only depict the difficulty of slave resistance, but they also
obstruct "enjoyment" of what is ultimately a sacred history. That being
said, *Freedom*'s opacity feels somehow less generative than my
experience of *Méwilo*, a game made the year before *Freedom*, to which
we turn our attention now.[^56]

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro7.png"
    title="Screen captures from Atari, French version"
    caption="Fig. 7. Screen captures from Atari, French version. The PC encounters named characters who might be made into alliances. In the first, Afoukal responds to the PC's attempts to \"rally\" him, \"Oh, no, Liberty holds no promise for us. Running is dangerous, man.\""
%}

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro8.png"
    title="Screen captures from Atari, French version"
    caption="Fig. 8. In the second, the PC encounters Timolet and is offered the button to attempt to rally him. The image of Timolet is based on Chamoiseau's physical appearance."
%}


## Part III. Winnable(?)

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro9.png"
    title="Screen capture from *Méwilo*, Atari, French version."
    caption="Fig. 9. Screen capture from *Méwilo*, Atari, French version. First screen that sets the scene as the PC journeys to St. Pierre. (\"It is the 7th of May, 1902. After 15 days of crossing you arrive in sight of the green coast of the isle of flowers.\")"
%}


*Méwilo* serves as a perfect example of a creolized videogame: it
foregrounds Martinican history, culture, and folklore; and, as a
co-authored videogame, is necessarily multimodal. But not only does the
game rely on text, sounds, visuals, and animation, but it also includes
a variety of paratextual elements---a manual featuring a story by
Patrick Chamoiseau, "Les derniers jours d'une mulâtresse," a glossary of
select terms, and a recipe. The original packaging supposedly also came
with a tape by a band called Malavoi.[^57] The game and its packaging
constitute a kind of Creole stew, which may be intentional given that
the recipe for callaloo will play an important role in the player's path
through the game.

Chamoiseau's commitment to opacity is evident in the game's limited
invitation to participate in the narrative. *Méwilo* is rigidly
compartmentalized on a structural level. The player faces multiple
challenges, some of which can only be solved through trial-and-error,
and others that, in my experience, required seeking the help of others
online. Whether the game is more opaque for the retrogamer---obliged to
find workarounds in order to get it to load---or easier, thanks to the
internet and access to google---is a matter for another place and time.
Whichever the case, I found the game's puzzles very difficult to solve.

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro10.png"
    title="Screen capture from *Méwilo*, Atari, French version."
    caption="Fig. 10. Screen capture from *Méwilo*, Atari, French version. Clarisse gives the PC her opinion on the restless \"zombie\" and a helpful tip on how to proceed."
%}

Even more so than with *Freedom*, *Méwilo* seems like it should be
simple, as the structure is logically plotted from one episode to the
next. Nevertheless, the game holds the player at arm's length. Its form
accords integrally with the central theme of its narrative: the
challenges of putting the ghosts of slavery to rest.

### Axiomatic Play

*Méwilo*, like *Freedom*, is a videogame "about" slavery in the
Caribbean, and both games use a map as the central home screen. That is
where the similarities end. Unlike *Freedom*, which is set on a
plantation, in *Méwilo*, the player steps into the shoes of an unnamed
PC, who appears to be a detective with paranormal abilities, in order to
solve the case of a ghost that haunts a former plantation.

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro-vid3.png"
    title="Gameplay from very early in *Méwilo*, German version, Atari system, played on Hatari."
    caption="Clip 3. Gameplay from very early in *Méwilo*, German version, Atari system, played on Hatari."
    url="https://youtu.be/edqk9DfeW4g"
%}

*Méwilo*'s stated objective is to calm the restless spirits that
literally haunt the residents of the plantation Grand Parnasse.
Figuratively, the game grapples with the tensions that exist between
descendants of the enslaved, slave-masters, and the cast of so-called
mixed-race people. By the time gameplay has ended, the player has been
asked to figure out a genealogical map of the various characters they
have encountered in order to set free the *zombi*, the trapped spirit of
a murdered slave, whose ghost guards the master's buried gold.

The opening title cards read: "Nous sommes le 7 mai 1902, après 15 jours
de traversée vous arrivez en vue des cotés verdoyantes de l'île aux
fleurs. Dans ce pays de magie, vos pouvoirs paranormaux sont
décuplés."[^58] It then explains how to use the cursor to navigate the
map, but even this is put in terms of shapeshifting: "Pour vous déplacer
aisement, vous prenez l'apparence d'un colibri..."[^59] Aside from this
instruction regarding how to zoom out to the map, little direction is
provided, and part of the gameplay involves exploring the space to
discover what is or is not interactive.

Many sites on the map, like the Pitt, do nothing until that dimension of
the quest has been unlocked. Other sites remain insurmountable until all
the other pieces are in place: traveling to Petite Savane, for example,
results in the player's instant death because of the presence of a
deadly snake. One may die here several times, before finally accepting
that it is a dead end. The "game over" card reads: "*Vous etes
transformé en soucougnan, condamné à errer l'éternité durant...*"[^60]
Only once the gamer has obtained a mongoose (successfully bribing it
with fruit obtained in a different part of the game) can this landscape
be traversed. But that comes much later.

The game thus begins with the illusion of choice. The player thinks they
can pilot to any of the many named locations on the map, but soon learns
that the game operates by a kind of locked door mechanism: only one door
will open at a time, bringing up new content to learn, or a challenge to
be solved, at which point another door opens somewhere within the game.
Figuring out which door has been activated is part of the gameplay. The
map will look the same, but by navigating to the various locations, the
player may discover a new element. Suddenly, a character may appear, or
a spot that yielded nothing before will now activate when clicked upon.

Until very near the end of the game, clicking on Montagne Pelée brings
up only the following warning, "Le 8 mai 1902 à 8h02, c'est l'enfer: le
flanc sud-ouest de la montagne s'ouvre pour vomir une énorme fumée
ardente sillonnée d'éclairs. 30 000 morts! St. Pierre n'existe
plus..."[^61] We might assume that it is the PC's psychic ability that
allows us to access this advance knowledge. Chamoiseau's stamp on the
game makes for uncommonly vivid videogame copy.

The first door of the game's narrative is opened by visiting the
location on the map called Grand Parnasse. Yes, it *is* the same name as
the plantation in *Freedom*, and Arnaud de Ronan, named here as the
ancestral master of Grand Parnasse, was one of the potential NPC masters
in *Freedom*, suggesting that the two games are set on the same
plantation.[^62] In *Méwilo*, much of the backstory concerns a slave
revolt, furthering the sense that the two games are connected. At Grand
Parnasse, one encounters Monsieur et Madame Hubert-Destouches, the pair
who have hired the PC to fix their haunted plantation problem and who
provide the important backstory about the haunting.

As one navigates the game, with each conversation leading to a clue as
to how to find and attempt the next activated challenge, three things
become evident. First, there is ample foreshadowing of the volcano's
eruption, with characters noting strange natural phenomena. Second, the
characters paint a portrait of political tensions among the various
classes inhabiting St. Pierre and the neighboring plantations, with much
strife evident between the various social classes, including the white
*béké* class, the "mixed-race" freedmen and women, and the Black
enslaved population.[^63] My focus will be on the game's productive
difficulty, and what that tells us about interpellation of this rich
history.[^64]

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro-vid4.png"
    title="Clip 4. Gameplay from early in *Méwilo*, French version, Atari system, played on Hatari."
    caption="Clip 4. Gameplay from early in *Méwilo*, French version, Atari system, played on Hatari."
    url="https://youtu.be/DJz_F9QX0ls"
%}


*Méwilo* is decidedly a better game than *Freedom*, with more structured
scaffolding and a clear and compelling narrative that might interest
many scholars of Caribbean history, as well as those familiar with
Chamoiseau's work. It is a simple point and click adventure game, very
much in the same vein as Roberta Williams' *Kings Quest* series (1980
Sierra Entertainment). For example, a *loupe* (magnifying glass) on a
table in the salon of a plantation house can be touched, but only once
the player obtains a mysterious old letter does its utility become
clear.[^65] Similarly, only upon learning the story of how the Ronan
family, in escaping the slave rebellion of 1831, sought shelter with
their neighbors, the Banvilles, can the player navigate to the Banville
plantation, Lys Vert. Prior to obtaining this piece of information,
clicking on Fond Cacao on the map led only to the player being turned
away after viewing an image of a cart in a field.

Thus, the game proceeds with the discovery of various keys that open
various doors, giving the game a linear trajectory. It operates on a
funnel mechanism, as there is only one path forward. However, this is
not to say that gameplay is always smooth, with one step leading
logically to the next. There are several hurdles in the game that feel
insurmountable, and it is to these we now turn. The game's true
variability is the matter of how long it takes the player to solve each
challenge, many of which are very difficult, explicitly embracing
Chamoiseau's preferred modality, opacity.

### Opacity

There are several hurdles in the game that take quite some time to
master. Echevin, a man living on the plantation, has information you
need about the strange goings-on at Grand Parnasse. But he will only
reveal the necessary information if given a bottle of rum.[^66] To get
this rum, the player must go to the distillery and correctly answer
eight questions on Caribbean history and culture, including about
Martinique's original peoples, its conquest by the French, and various
aspects of its language and culture. These questions are hard. Miss even
one, and the player has to go off and do some other things before the
distiller will restart the quiz. The questions also rotate, so it can
take several tries to get past this part of the game.

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro11.png"
    title="Fig. 11. Screen capture from *Méwilo*, Atari, French version."
    caption="Fig. 11. Screen capture from *Méwilo*, Atari, French version. One cannot advance in the game without successfully answering eight questions about Martinican culture. Translation: \"The women's hairstyle known as 'tete a bouts' has a signification \[related to\] 1. social \[standing\] 2. warrior \[status\] 3. sentimental \[meaning\]\""
%}


The questions posed in the quiz contain colloquialisms unique to
Martinique, which makes it difficult to cheat by using Google (I know, I
tried.) Within their multiple-choice options, they impart a sense of the
weight of the history of slavery, as slavery and resistance haunt
various questions and their potential responses. For example, a possible
answer for the definition of a "*fer de lance*" is "a weapon used by a
rebel slave," whereas snake is the correct response. A "*collier de
chou*" might be a device used to yoke slaves to each other (which it is
not) or a kind of jewelry (which it is) or a type of vegetable (which
Google erroneously led me to believe.)[^67] Finally, by successfully
answering all eight questions given by the distiller, the PC is given a
bottle of rum, which can be brought to Papa Echevin. A player from the
Caribbean would have a vastly different experience of this part of the
game and might sail through the test on the first try; Thereby, the
game's cultural opacity functions as a sieve, allowing certain players
to pass and holding up others, at least until they learn a few things.
Although certain moments in the game feel pedagogical, where clicking on
a particular spot brings up extra information, such as the names of
common flowers in Martinique (as in the garden at Grand Parnasse) or
information about the types of crops (at Fond Cacao), these moments only
serve to contrast with the episodes of profound opacity, in which the
game refuses to yield to a certain type of player.

Like Timolet in *Freedom*, Echevin was modeled as Chamoiseau's
doppelganger.[^68] And like the author, the character of Echevin has a
way with words. He first states, "Un rhum comme ca, c'est une clé pour
mon cœur, pour ma gorge, pour ma mémoire,"[^69] which admits the broader
mechanics of the game that work on the level of closed doors and object
or information "keys." He then states, "Il faut haïr les chiens mais
reconnaître leurs dents blanches,"[^70] an idiom that, as he swiftly
explains, means that despite the whites' many faults, they make good
rum. Sepinwall notes from her interviews with Tramis that the games are
"suffused with Creole proverbs" and cites this as an example.[^71] Thus
while the game is available only in French and German, Chamoiseau has
infused it with his trademark creolizing linguistic play.[^72]

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro12.png"
    title="Fig. 12 Screen capture from *Méwilo*, Atari, French version."
    caption="Fig. 12 Screen capture from *Méwilo*, Atari, French version. Papa Echevin reluctantly gives the player background on the characters and their ancestral lineage."
%}


Echevin gives us another aphorism that is harder to decode: "Menteur est
sans mémoire mais la mémoire n'est pas menteuse,"[^73] before divulging
that the angry spirit plaguing the household is a member of the
ancestral family. That decoding everyone's familial relationships is
central to the game is already suggested in this early scene (when the
point count is 03/99) in Echevin's passing reference to his sister
"Celucie," whom the player later comes to know as Man Cécé, a woman
serving callaloo at the port.

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro13.png"
    title="Fig. 13. Screen capture from *Méwilo*, Atari, French version."
    caption="Fig. 13. Screen capture from *Méwilo*, Atari, French version. Guessing the key ingredient in Man Cécé's Callaloo is one of the most difficult challenges in the game. Translation: \[Ah! If Da Evélina gave you her mongoose Zouzoufe, then you must be someone good...\]"
%}

Another major stumbling block for the player occurs with a visit to
Gwanzong the *quimboiseur* (defined in the manual's glossary as a
"sorcier craint et respecté" a feared and respected sorcerer), who lives
at the top of the mountain that is already spewing ash and convulsing
(as is gleaned from conversation with the various characters one
encounters). The player is told by Malou at the lycée to bring the
*quimboiseur* a gift of a black frizzled chicken. The presence of the
Pitt on the map (which, as the gamer may learn from the distiller's
quiz, signifies a cock-fighting ring) makes the next move obvious, and
this location at last becomes active. But the keeper of the cocks is a
prankster who says he will only donate a chicken if the player correctly
answers one of his mysterious riddles. They are very difficult, even
nonsensical, and seem to have been invented by the author. As with the
distiller's multiple-choice quiz, there is a large pool from which the
questions are drawn, but there is no multiple choice to help here. This
time, with a blank to fill in, trial-and-error is not an option. Even if
one finally guesses correctly, the cheeky character insists that the
player answer a second riddle to prove that the first time was no fluke!

{% include image.html
    img="issue07/lauro-vid5.png"
    title="Clip 5. Gameplay from late in *Méwilo*, French version, Atari
system, played on Hatari."
    caption="Clip 5. Gameplay from late in *Méwilo*, French version, Atari
system, played on Hatari."
    url="https://youtu.be/Cn1-5o6k-qI"
%}


To be perfectly honest, I would never have beaten the game had I not
resorted to reading gamers' blogs for tricks and tips and to watching a
playthru of the Amstrad version, which is very nearly the same (Amstrad
Maniaque). This business with the chicken riddler was very hard, but I
spied some familiar riddles in the playthru on Youtube, which was
helpful. Watching someone else play the game does not solve all the
problems. Although the sample complete playthru on Youtube posted by
Amstrad Maniaque shows the player returning to the cathedral, obtaining
a secret letter from Minerve Doussaint by clicking on the book under her
arm, I could not get this to activate for me no matter what I tried. Was
this a glitch? Was I doing something wrong? Perhaps the iterations of
the game were different.[^74]

With a score of 63/99, and having finished more than half of the game, I
was ready to call it quits. And then I found a cheat, a blog by a gamer
named Oli who gives step-by-step instructions on how to defeat the
game.[^75] Oli calls the part of the game where I got blocked "un petit
bug," but with the help of his explicit instructions, I was able to get
past it.[^76] Relying on his instructions the rest of the way, which I
followed like a recipe, I completed the game, but the truth is that I
absolutely would never have been able to beat it on my own. Even after
several more passes through the game, I still remain uncertain as to how
the player is meant to deduce the solution to the final problem, in
which one can release the trapped spirit of the faithful slave by
correctly naming their oldest living descendants. To arrive at the
answers, one would have to plot a family tree for each character from
the start of the gameplay. Although there are subtle clues as to how the
townspersons are related to each other, their lineage is rarely
concretely and directly laid out; instead, there are obscure asides made
about the mixed-race children of slave-masters, and clues to be decoded
in their names.[^77] With this attention to ancestry and genealogies,
*Méwilo* adopts the opacity of Chamoiseau's griot, who obscures as he
reveals,[^78] in this case, raising unspoken questions about the abuse
of enslaved women. Although I now know the correct answers (thanks to
Oli), I still fail to see how one could reasonably arrive at the correct
answers. In a stroke of bad luck, even after getting the answers from
this cheat online, I spelled one of the names wrong when entering it
into the game system, necessitating that I start the whole thing over
from the beginning. But then again, I was stumped by the distiller's
quiz, so another player may have a different experience: perhaps the
game isn't as punishing for all players as it was for me.

In *The Dark Side of Game Play: Controversial Issues in Playful
Environments*, Miguel Sicart presents "abusive game design" as fostering
"dark play" to create a specific kind of aesthetic experience.
"\[A\]busive game design creates objects that resist appropriation," he
argues, "and in that resistance they create the space of possibility in
which the very point of playing is questioned".[^79] Although abusive
game design's dark play and what I am describing in *Méwilo* both
engender experiences of frustration, displeasure, and unhappiness (as
opposed to what we expect from "play"), the kind of punishing game
design Sicart describes differs from the modes of opacity deployed in
games that depict slavery and revolt. First, abusive game design
reflects the designer's effort to initiate a conversation with the
player.[^80] The aesthetics of opacity I seek to map out need not have
been implemented willfully, but can also include things like bugs,
glitches, misunderstandings, misinformation, and temporal opacity or
technological obsolescence. Secondly, abusive game design is understood
to be "highly non-ideological," apolitical and aesthetic rather than
persuasive,[^81] whereas the use of opacity that interests me as a
resistive strategy aims specifically to protect history from becoming
satisfying play.

Aside from his physical likeness and the poetic dialogue, Chamoiseau's
stamp on the game is evident in the manual. Its inclusion of a short
story, "Les derniers jours d'une mulâtresse"[^82] and of a limited
Creole glossary set the scene for the game; the included tale itself
evokes similar narrative elements to the game, including the eruption of
the volcano and a haunted atmosphere. The story may serve as an
introduction for those totally unfamiliar with Martinique, to words like
"*colibri*," "*béké*," and "*vetiver*," but it is of no help with
respect to any of the game's pivotal challenges. Insofar as the manual
and glossary do not actually help with answers needed at several key
points in the game, they might be thought of as a clever use of
misdirection. Although several of the same locations in the game are
referenced in this story, the narrative has no connection to the game's
plot. And the text's emphasis of the number 1344 (the number of pages in
the diary of the deceased titular character) is repeated several times,
in bold, suggesting to the reader/player that this has some significance
to one of the game's many puzzles.[^83] It does not.

The manual also states that the callaloo recipe provided therein will be
useful to answer a question at some point in the game, but the manual
provides a recipe for the way the dish is prepared in Guadeloupe. The
player is prompted to tell Man Cécé, who sells her dish at the port,
which ingredient is added in Martinican versions of the dish. Here we
might choose to read the game as hailing particular players, because
those with certain cultural knowledge can pass to a higher level of the
game than those without. Because the Guadelopean rather than the
Martinican recipe is given in the manual, it is not a question of
guessing ingredients from a given list. Rather, the player must seek
outside knowledge to determine what should be added. How this would have
been possible for players unfamiliar with Caribbean cuisine in the world
before the internet is unclear: perhaps they would have sought out a
recipe book or availed themselves of the network of game cheats provided
in gaming magazines and on Minitel, the pre-cursor to the internet, now
lost to us.[^84] It is certainly difficult to imagine what the
expectations of the contemporary player might have been. What is certain
is that, as a result of playing the game, the player will have learned
(or demonstrated knowledge) about Martinique's history and culture. But
many other aspects of the game remain, importantly, beyond the player's
grasp.

## Part IV. Conclusion.

My study of *Méwilo* and *Freedom* has been restricted here to a broad
analysis of the mechanisms utilized in the games insofar as these are
similar to Chamoiseau's literary works. Both of these games make use of
opacity in order to safeguard the history of slavery and slave revolt
even in this interactive, playable form. Many have asked, should
*gaming* be the medium for telling this story? Muriel Tramis's response
to this fraught question is perhaps the most satisfying:

> Like cinema or comics, videogames must be used to testify or make
> people think. There are very harsh themes that have been dealt with in
> cinema such as war or disease, yet cinema is an industry of
> 'entertainment.' The interactivity that exists in videogames offers an
> additional dimension of involvement for users. [^85]

Perhaps Tramis is thinking here of the pedagogical benefits of
interactivity, but what makes the medium of videogames ideal for staging
conversations about slavery and resistance is not only its
interactivity, but also the designer's ability to withhold interactivity
in structuring insurmountable challenges. Even further, the medium is
well-suited to showcase narratives of enslavement and resistance because
although the structure of the game may attempt to impose a rigid order,
the system itself may defy even the designer---as by glitching,
crashing, or presenting other technological issues. When the legacy of
historical enslavement and slave revolt becomes fodder for gamers, it is
all the more important that we attend to the ways that the form of
videogames can work in tandem with the content, deploying opacity in
ways that safeguard the subject matter from commercialization,
appropriation, and mindless enjoyment.

---

[^1]: Edmond Chang, "Close Playing: A meditation on teaching with
    videogames" (11.11.2010),
    <http://www.edmondchang.com/2010/11/11/close-playing-a-meditation/>.

[^2]: *Éloge de la creolité* was a manifesto whose authors (Jean
    Bernabé, Patrick Chamoiseau and Raphaël Confiant) argued that the
    predecessor movements of *négritude* (Aimé Césaire) and
    *antillanité* (Édouard Glissant), which sought to define
    Afro-Caribbean identity, did not go far enough in embracing the
    hybridity, plurality, and radical potential of creolization.
    According to the authors of *Éloge*, Césaire's *négritude* was a
    "violent and paradoxical therapy" (889) that, while seeking to break
    the stranglehold of European cultural domination by appealing to a
    pan-African identity, ultimately amounted to the substitution of one
    brand of mimeticism for another. By contrast, the authors quarrel
    with Glissant's *antillanité* was minor. They agreed with his
    assessment of the inherent plurality of "Caribbeanness" but argued
    that his writings on the subject were "more a matter of vision than
    a concept" (890). And in short, they hoped to set Glissant's
    philosophy on its feet. Their complaint with Glissant is hard to
    distill down to a line or two, possibly because it is unconvincing.
    Holly Collins writes: "One could say that the idea of creolité,
    based largely on Glissant's theories and writings, evolved out of
    Antillean self-assertion and additionally seeks to promote Creole as
    a language as well as a cultural idea" (70). Chamoiseau later
    clarified that he supported the Glissantian "appreciation of the
    ongoing process of creolization as opposed to an essentialist
    celebration of Creole culture" (Knepper, 27). A major bone of
    contention was its masculinist characterization of creoleness and a
    general carelessness with the issue of gender, which would lead to
    an overt critique by Maryse Condé, first in the 1995 collection
    published by Condé and Madeleine Cottenet-Hage called *Penser la
    créolité.* For a helpful gloss on this issue, Note 52, p. 143 in
    Wendy Knepper's *Patrick Chamoiseau: A Critical Introduction*.

[^3]: Tramis also has another game about slavery, *Lost in Time* (Coktel
    Vision, 1993) which is described as a time travel adventure game,
    but Chamoiseau did not work on that one, and so far I have been
    unable to play it.

[^4]: In her interview with Sepinwall, Tramis reveals that she "tapped
    Chamoiseau to write \[both\] game's dialogue and text boxes" (217).
    See also n 12, p. 292 which contrasts the text of the jewel case
    materials for the French language Atari version of *Freedom*, in
    which it is stated that the original idea was Chamoiseau's; in
    Tramis's recent recollection, they came up with the concept
    "collaboratively."

[^5]: Alenda Chang,"Une Vie Bien Jouée/A Life Well Played: The Cultural
    Legacy of Game Designer Muriel Tramis," *Feminist Media Histories*
    6, no. 1 (2020), 151. Chang provides a good overview of Tramis's
    work in the preface to the interview. See also Filip Jankowski, "The
    Presence of French Female Game Designers in Video Game Industry,
    1985-1993." Tramis's work has also been profiled in Tristan
    Donovan's *Replay: The History of Video Games* (2010) and Mark J.P
    Wolf's edited collection *Videogames Around the World* (2015).

[^6]: Maddi Chilton, "A Forgotten, Decades-old Game about Slavery has
    returned," *Killscreen,* (May 31, 2016).

[^7]: Chilton.

[^8]: Alyssa Goldstein Sepinwall, *Slave Revolt on Screen: The Haitian
    Revolution in Film and Videogames* (Jackson: U of Mississippi,
    2021).

[^9]: For those looking for a discussion of slavery and videogames more
    broadly, see Emil Hammar "Counter-Hegemonic Commemorative Play," and
    Souvik Mukherjee's article "Video Games and Slavery." Souvik
    Mukjerjee raises an important question in "Videogames and Slavery,"
    regarding whether it is "impossible to play from the position of a
    slave as that involves an absence of agency and selfhood" (252), but
    as these games are more about resistance than about slavery, this
    remains unanswerable. For those interested in games and empathy the
    discussion of "serious games" may also prove fruitful to explore,
    and that is discussed in Bogost's *Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogame*. The MIT Press, 2010.


[^10]: The word "zombi" (or "zombie") hardly needs a footnote, but the
    use of the word here (and elsewhere in Chamoiseau's oeuvre) is less
    like the more familiar walking corpse that came into popular
    understanding through the Haitian concept of the *kokadav*, and more
    like a ghost, while a soucoyan is a shape-shifting vampire. Page 2
    of the Freedom manual explicitly defines the potential roles of the
    quimboiseurs (sorcerers) and of the Sirène Manman-Dlo, the mermaid
    water diety, who can add more time to the player's clock if
    encountered.

[^11]: Renée K. Gosson, "For What the Land Tells: An Ecocritical
    Approach to Patrick Chamoiseau's "Chronicle of the Seven Sorrows"
    *Callaloo*, 26, no. 1, (Winter, 2003): 232.

[^12]: Tristan Donovan, *Replay: The History of Video Games*. Sussex:
    Yellow Ant (2010): 127.

    For more on this trope of buried treasure, often guarded by the
    ghost of a murdered slave, see Coverdale, "Notes" (note 54, p.144).

[^13]: Jean Bernabé, Patrick Chamoiseau and Raphaël Confiant *Éloge de
    la Créolité*. (1989.) Trans. Mohamed B. Taleb Khyar, *Callaloo*, 13,
    no. 4 (Autumn, 1990): 893.

[^14]: I have not yet explored scholarly work written in French on the
    subject of slavery in games. In part, this is because work on
    videogames was first taken seriously in US academic circles, and the
    field remains more deeply engaged by scholars writing in English.
    However, Julien Bazile has written a thesis on the broader topic of
    the Assassin's Creed games for Université de Lorraine; Université de
    Sherbrooke (Québec, Canada); he also delivered a conference paper
    specifically on Muriel Tramis's games about slavery called
    "L'Histoire à traverser. Regards vidéoludiques sur l'histoire de la
    Martinique dans Mewilo et Freedom de Muriel Tramis."

[^15]: Ilmari. "Interview with Muriel Tramis," *The Adventure Gamer* 19
    (Mar 2018).

    \<<https://advgamer.blogspot.com/2018/03/interview-with-muriel-tramis.html>[\>]{.underline}

[^16]: Sepinwall's interview with Tramis reveals that she sought to
    address the absences in the historical record, "to integrate into
    games the history of her enslaved ancestors, which was discussed
    privately but not taught in school" (211). This is a central theme,
    too, in the writings of Chamoiseau, particularly evident in School
    Days.

[^17]: Donovan, *Replay: The History of Video Games*, 127.

[^18]: Sepinwall, 212.

[^19]: For two examples of the ways that folklore inscribes the history
    of slavery, see my book *The Transatlantic Zombie: Slavery,
    Rebellion, and Living Death* and Bryan Wagner, *Tar Baby: A Global
    History*.

[^20]: Here I am explicitly referring to Achille Mbembe's "The Power of
    the Archive and its Limits" and Saidiya Hartman's "Venus in Two
    Acts." Those interested in archive trouble should see the special
    issue of the journal History of the Present, edited by Brian
    Connolly and Marisa Fuentes. My book Kill the Overseer and article
    "Digital Commemorations of Slave Revolt" also discuss the redress of
    the historical archive through the digital form. Readers
    specifically interested in the archive and Martinique should see
    Christine Chivallon's ethnography of accounts of the descendants of
    slaves, as a counter-archive.

[^21]: In Glissant's *Poetics of Relation*, opacity is discussed in
    terms of identity and acceptance of others. The key idea is that we
    should "give up this old obsession with discovering what lies at the
    bottom of natures" (190). The idea is that one should not have to
    walk a mile in another's shoes in order to be respectful.

[^22]: Linda Coverdale, "Afterword," in Patrick Chamoiseau, *Chronique
    des sept misères.* (1986) Trans. Linda Coverdale. (Lincoln:
    University of Nebraska Press, 1999), 128.

[^23]: Coverdale, 216.

[^24]: See Knepper, 96.

[^25]: Patrick Chamoiseau and Georges Puisy. *Delgrès, Les Antilles Sous
    Bonaparte*, éditions Émile Désormeaux, Pointe à Pitre (1981), xvii.

[^26]: Chamoiseau and Puisy, xvii.

[^27]: To name but a few: *Chronique des sept misères*, 1986; *Solibo
    Magnifique*, 1988; the Prix-Goncourt winning *Texaco*, 1992;
    *L\'Esclave vieil homme et le Molosse*,1997; as well as several
    autobiographical works, like *Chemin d'Ecole*, 1994

[^28]:  Patrick Chamoiseau, *Texaco* (1992) Trans. Rose-Myriam Réjouis
    and Val Vinokurov, trans, 1997. (New York: Vintage Books, 1998).  

[^29]: *Solibo Magnificent* is a police procedural about a surreal
    event: a man who died of an *égorgette*, which is translated as
    being "snick'd" (20), *killed* by a word he uttered.

[^30]:  Chamoiseau, *Chronicle of the Seven Sorrows*. (1986). Trans.
    Linda Coverdale. (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1999); As
    Sepinwall has noted previously (220), in *Freedom* there are
    man-eating dogs, which features centrally in *Slave Old Man.*

[^31]:  See Wendy Knepper on the "ludic function of Creole stories":
    "For all of its magic, play, and opacity, the tales are engaged,
    politically and socially, with the situation of reader and
    storyteller" (101).

[^32]:  See Sepinwall, n. 5, 291. I'm grateful to Sepinwall for her
    chapter on these games, and for her generosity sharing resources.

[^33]: On choice and limitation in videogames see Ian Bogost,
    *Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames* and *How to
    Do Things With Videogames* as well as Alexander Galloway, *Gaming:
    Essays on Algorithmic Culture* and Jesper Juul, *Half-Real:
    Videogames between Real Rules and Fictional Worlds*.

[^34]: On this point see Edouard Glissant's "A Word Scratcher," an
    introduction to the republished translation of *Chronique des sept
    misères* in Patrick Chamoiseau, *Chronique des sept misères*. (1986)
    Trans. Linda Coverdale. (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press:
    1999).

[^35]: There is the game as it was designed (the program), but each
    gamer brings to the game diverse skill levels, from hand- eye
    coordination to predecessor knowledge of game structures, to
    cultural references, historical knowledge, and language ability.
    This is, of course, equally true of the experience of reading a
    book---but the form of the game, which actively resists the player's
    ascension to the next level, makes this more obvious than a written
    text does.

[^36]:  For those interested in seeing more of these games, there are
    some limited playthrus available on Youtube. Watching these will
    give one a sense of the difficulty of playing these retro games for
    the contemporary gamer---the mechanics are not intuitive for someone
    who has grown up with a different level of technology, and the fact
    that the manual is only available online in French presents a
    further difficulty for some. I have found three playthrus online
    (each between 6 and 8 mins). The first two made no attempt to rally
    the slaves, but the third, by petslimjim2 allows you to watch, in
    real time, the gamer figuring out that you have to not only click on
    a slave's hut to force a conversation with them, but then, further,
    to click on their forehead in the picture that is then brought up of
    them in order to attempt to convince them to join the cause. (It was
    excruciating to watch, and the manual does not specify this aspect
    of the mechanics). Petsasjim1's playthru provides a handy
    illustration of the game's temporal opacity for today's gamer.
    \<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jQ_LgjDO4dQ&t=63s\>

[^37]:  See Lauro, *Kill the Overseer*. This article also comes out of a
    piece I was writing on "Creolizing videogames" as a strategy of
    antiracism, and I think of these two articles as linked. See Lauro,
    "Creolizing Video Games," forthcoming, in Soraya Murray and
    TreaAndrea Russworm's edited collection *Anti-Racist Futures: Games,
    Play, and the Speculative Imagination.*

[^38]: Ilmari, "Missed Classic 28."

[^39]: "The goal to be attained varies with the type of master." Unless
    otherwise noted, all translations are my own,

[^40]: Sepinwall, 222.

[^41]:  The game was engineered for Amstrad CPC, Amiga and Atari ST/E.
    It can be played online at
    <http://dos.zone/freedom-rebels-in-the-darkness-1988/> or software
    can be downloaded, such as from myabandonware.com and run with an
    emulator. For the Atari software, one can use the Hatari emulator,
    but it takes some finagling to get it to run, I found. My experience
    of playing the game was a bit smoother once I ran the software on
    Hatari, rather than through the websites, so I describe only my play
    with this specific platform.

[^42]:  See Sepinwall's chapter on this game for a discussion of the
    historical allusions among these characters' names---I would add
    that it is not apparent that the characters are meant to incarnate
    their historical namesakes; for example, the manual makes no mention
    of special qualities that we associate with these figures. The
    game's Makandal, for instance, has no special poisoning skills
    despite being named for Ayiti's "Lord of Poison," and instead the
    manual divides the character options between "salt water and
    freshwater," those born in the colony versus those recently imported
    from Africa.

[^43]: "fights poorly"

[^44]: "brutal and severe"

[^45]: Sometimes, though it did not seem consistently dependent on
    platform, I could get the system to allow me to make further
    selections, such as adjusting my chosen characters' skill levels in
    their other aspects, like charisma, which is necessary to recruit
    other enslaved persons. In the easiest setting, the game also allows
    one to select among options for the others on the plantation, making
    it seem as if the player might choose all the weakest enemies and
    cakewalk through the game, but alas, it is not so. I studied the
    manual, chose all of the weakest antagonists and the strongest
    possible compatriots, thinking that I would surely sail through the
    gameplay this time. If this had been effective, it would mean that a
    good part of the gameplay could consist of researching the various
    characters in the manual and adjusting the percentages for strengths
    like fire-starting, lock-picking, climbing, and their talents in
    fortitude and persuasion, as well as selecting personae for the
    gameplay.

[^46]: On this point, Tramis's answer to Ilmari is evasive: Q: While I
    was playing *Freedom*, I couldn\'t complete the game. The manual
    mentioned that winning would require killing all guard dogs, but I
    always failed to kill the last of them. Now, I understand if you
    have forgotten the minor details about the game, but was
    there some trick to how to deal with
    the dogs? And what was the ending of *Freedom* like?\
    A: If it is impossible to win this is
    not intentional on our side. The game certainly lacks fine tuning
    and it's probably different from one machine to another (Amstrad,
    Amiga or Atari) because of the difference in speed of the
    processors.

[^47]:  Jean-Baptiste Labat (1663-1738) was a member of the Dominican
    order stationed in Martinique, who wrote extensively (but
    uncritically) on the lives of slaves and is credited with
    modernizing rum production.

[^48]:  For example, see Maeve McCusker, *Patrick Chamoiseau: Recovering
    Memory*, who writes that Chamoiseau's œuvre "explicitly and
    consistently engages with the key debates in this highly contested
    field: the relationship between private and public memory, the
    borderline between history and fiction, the significance of
    repressed and traumatic memory, the processes and problematics of
    autobiographical memory, the relationship between the body and
    memory, the role of the witness and the archive in storing,
    transmitting and (de)forming memory, the lure of nostalgia, the
    commodification of memory" (15). See also Wendy Knepper, *Patrick
    Chamoiseau: A Critical Introduction*, especially for her discussion
    of Chamoiseau's use of "masquerade" in character/author hybrids; his
    "use of masks can be situated as a response to the 'chronological
    illusion' which has been shaped through and by colonial discourses"
    (5-6).

[^49]: See Ian Bogost, *Persuasive Games* and *How to Do Things with
    Videogames* (20). For a discussion of the particular uses of
    frustration, see Kiel Gilleade and Alan Dix, "Using Frustration in
    the Design of Adaptive Videogames."

[^50]: "Negro huts"

[^51]: "There are 204 \[persons\] in 14 huts of ten field slaves + six
    huts of ten craftsmen + the \[separate\] huts of medicine man, obeah
    man, leader, and prisoner."

[^52]:  See Emil Hammar's discussion of this unfortunate element of the
    Ubisoft game *Freedom Cry* in "Counter-Hegemonic Commemorative
    Play."

[^53]: The game's first-generation audience also found fault with the
    game, see for example *Computer + Video Games's* review of
    *Freedom*, preserved here by Amiga Magazine Rack:
    <http://amr.abime.net/review_24095> 5

[^54]:  In contrast to the aforementioned review in *Computer + Video
    Games*, see the reviews by Alistair Scott and Nev Astly, both from
    *Amiga Computing*, which have more positive views of the game's
    graphics and sound.

[^55]:  For a discussion of "selective interactivity" see Ian Bogost,
    *Persuasive Games*, 46; on "operationalized weakness," see Ian
    Bogost, *How to Do Things with Videogames*, 20.

[^56]: Sepinwall, 222.

[^57]:  Salvador, "Muriel Tramis."

[^58]: "It is the 7th of May, 1902. After 15 days of crossing you
    arrive in sight of the green coast of the isle of flowers. In this
    magic country, your paranormal powers are heightened."

[^59]: To move yourself easily, you take the form of a hummingbird...

[^60]: You are transformed into a *soucougnan*, condemned to wander for
    eternity...

[^61]: On the 8th of May, 1902 at 8:02 am, it's hell: the southwest
    flank of the mountain opens to spew forth an enormous cloud of fiery
    smoke ribboned with light. 30, 000 are dead. St. Pierre no longer
    exists.

[^62]: This contradicts the idea that *Freedom* was meant to be
    obliquely located somewhere in the Caribbean to suggest the region's
    shared history, whether the setting be Haiti, or Guadeloupe, rather
    than concretely situated in any one country, for example, explicitly
    set in Martinique and on the same plantation as in *Méwilo*. The
    confusion seems to arise from the fact that in interviews Muriel
    Tramis contradicts what is stated in the manual. Tramis appears to
    indicate one answer to A. Chang, (148) explicitly stating that the
    location of *Freedom* is Martinque, which Sepinwall (and, in my
    estimation, the game manual) disproves (Sepinwall 216-7 and manual,
    first page).

[^63]: The tension between the castes, classes, and races (including
    koulis laborers) is something that I cannot address in this study:
    someone with a better understanding of Martinique's early 20th
    century political history should take this up, especially for the
    game's references to an upcoming election. I see a great part of my
    contribution here as the invitation to other scholars to investigate
    these works for their content and the treatment of Caribbean history
    therein.

[^64]:  The experience of actually getting the games to play via
    emulators was fairly excruciating for me, so let me provide a kind
    of a recipe card here. I spent the better part of a day noodling
    around with different emulators and abandonware downloads. Hatari
    will run Atari games, for example, but there are other emulators. It
    took me far longer than perhaps it should have to figure out that I
    needed to use an emulator that was compatible with Mac OS and that,
    even then, I had to download a TOS to get it to run properly. After
    the emulator is downloaded and installed, one will have to get the
    software from a website repository like myabandonware.com, and then
    reconfigure some of the settings and image files to get it to load.
    (I would suggest starting with the Youtube tutorials by Gryphin Jun
    12 2020, \<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eU4cQkVssr8&t=149s\> and
    gwEm's gwEmbassy Jun 6 2020 video
    \<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bMNYd398Syk\>) If this seems
    overwhelming, *Freedom* is available in a lower-resolution version
    to play online via DOSzone,
    <http://dos.zone/freedom-rebels-in-the-darkness-1988/>, and I would
    suggest that people interested in these games start there. There is
    also a full playthru of the Amstrad version of *Méwilo*, which does
    have some subtle differences from the Atari version available on
    Youtube, posted by Amstrad Maniaque, Jan 24, 2018
    \<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YUjuFSrbS1w&t=1s\>

[^65]:  This is not in some versions of the game, like Amstrad.

[^66]:  As with *Freedom*, I played this game via the Atari version on
    an emulator. An alternate version of the game, made for Amstrad CPC,
    which I saw on a YouTube playthru, did not contain the character of
    Miss Clarisse, whom I encountered in the plantation kitchen and who
    gave me this clue as to how to loosen Echevin's tongue, so perhaps
    this was added later to reduce player frustration. See Amstrad
    Maniaque, posted Jan 24, 2018, Youtube.

[^67]:  I am very grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their comments
    on my draft, and especially for the comment that a "collier de chou"
    would likely be recognized not only by French Antilleans, but by
    anyone who had taken a tour in Martinique.

[^68]: Sepinwall, 215.

[^69]: "A rum like this is a *key* to my heart, my throat, my memory,"
    emphasis added.

[^70]: "One must hate dogs but recognize that their teeth are white."

[^71]: Sepinwall, 293.

[^72]:  Many of the author's works explicitly discuss the tension
    between French and Creole in Martinique. See Glissant, "A Word
    Scratcher," and Coverdale's Afterword to *Chronique des sept
    misères* (1986), in which she writes of Chamoiseau's address of the
    linguistic crisis of the creole writer: "the gap between the orality
    of Creole, a language born---of cruel necessity---in the days of
    slavery, and French, the language of a colonial power that proudly,
    ruthlessly, and efficiently discredited almost all Creole culture in
    the name of *la civilization française*" (Coverdale, 213). This
    theme is very evident in the novel *Solibo Magnifique*, in the
    memoir *Chemin d'Ecole*, and in many other places throughout the
    author's oeuvre. See for example, Rose-Myriam Réjouis, "Afterword:
    Sublime Tumble" *Solibo the Magnificent* (1988).

[^73]: "The liar is without memory, but memory is not a liar."

[^74]: Ultimately there was no Clarisse to be found in the nonexistent
    kitchen on Grand Parnasse in the Amstrad playthru, no magnifying
    glass in the salon, and no theater in St. Pierre, so the game
    versions are clearly slightly different. I never did get the theater
    to activate in the Atari version, and as this was not present in
    the Amstrad version of the game, I'm not sure what action was meant to
    happen there, though the theater is mentioned in the story that
    accompanies the game in the manual, written by Patrick Chamoiseau.

[^75]: A warning: if you use this right off the bat, you will not
    experience the frustrations that I think are part of the gameplay.
    It even includes answers to all of the distiller's questions and a
    few riddles. Best, I think, to resort to this guide only when one
    gets totally bogged down.
    \<https://jeux.dokokade.net/2015/02/12/soluce-retrocompatible-mewilo-atari-st-amiga-amstrad/\>

[^76]:  In my recent forerunner, *Kill the Overseer: The Gamification of
    Slave Resistance* I discussed the glitch as one among many
    opportunities for productive opacities within games about slave
    revolt.

[^77]: Here I am referring to a bit of conversation from Maitre
    DuChaudé: "Savez-vous par exemple que certains maitres baptisaient
    leur rejêton illegitime de l'anagramme de leur nom? C'est pourquoi
    devant un nom d'esclave, il vous faudra toujours cherchez
    l'astuce..." \[Did you know, for example, that certain masters
    baptized their illegitimate children with an anagram of their names?
    That's why when looking at a slave's name, you should always seek
    the clue...\]

[^78]: Chamoiseau, introduction to *Creole Tales,* xiii.

[^79]: Miguel Sicart, "Darkly Playing Others" in *The Dark Side of Game
    Play: Controversial Issues in Playful Environments*. Torrill Elvira
    Mortensen, Jonas Linderoth, Ashley ML Brown, eds. (New York:
    Routledge, 2015), 103.

[^80]: Qtd. in Sicart, 101.

[^81]: Sicart, 113.

[^82]: "The final days of a mulatta."

[^83]:  In the short story, the line "C'est pourquoi nous gardâmes dans
    la tête 1344 tandis que les cahiers rejoinaient les objets de Man
    Kalisa et s'y perdaient dans la même poussière, la même inanité."
    "That's why we keep in mind \[the number\] 1344 since the notebooks
    joined the objects of Man Kalisa \[the late mulâtresse, victim of
    the volcano\] and were lost in the same dust, the same inanity."
    Although absent from the Amstrad version, in the Atari game Pélagie
    St. Just's parrot squawks a four-digit code that could be activated
    on Minitel for cheat clues; perhaps there were clues about the
    recipe and other difficult aspects of the game there, but in the age
    of the internet, Minitel is long since defunct. The parrot's code,
    importantly, is not 1344.

[^84]: Although a few reviews appear to be noted on Amiga Magazine rack,
    I have been unable to access these, nor to find game hacks preserved
    online.

[^85]: A. Chang, 156.

