---
layout: article
section: introduction
guest: true
issue: 8
order: 1
date: March 2025
title: "Under Pressure Yet Vividly Alive: Papiamento Cultures And Histories In The Digital Realm"
doi: "10.7916/ARCHIPELAGOS-Q4XH-SG20"
author:
  - name: Margo Groenewoud
    shortname: Groenewoud
    bio: >
      Located in Curaçao, Dr. Margo Groenewoud is an independent scholar working with partners in the Caribbean, the United States, and the Netherlands. She is a cultural and social historian interested in new narratives about Caribbean transnationality, modernity and radicalism. Dr. Groenewoud wrote a dissertation on the entanglement of state, industry, religion and civil society in mid-twentieth century Curaçao. She published articles in international journals such as Small Axe, the Journal of Caribbean History, and the New West Indian Guide and is editor for Caribbean Conjunctures: The Caribbean Studies Association (CSA) Journal. Her historical research has been supported by the Fulbright Program, CUNY Dominican Studies Institute, the Dutch Research Council (NWO), the University of Curaçao (UoC), and the Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies (KITLV). Dr. Groenewoud has been a (guest) lecturer at the UoC and a range of international universities. In 2024, she had the honor of giving the yearly Tula Lecture for the National Institute for the Study of Dutch Slavery and its Legacy, Ninsee. Dr. Groenewoud is currently DH consultant for the Re/presenting Europe consortium in The Netherlands, and for the Digital Library of the Caribbean (dLOC) revitalization program supported by the Mellon Foundation.
language: en
pdf: true
---

The Creole language of Papiamento and its cultural context are relatively underrepresented in Caribbean Studies. This apparent disconnect or neglect largely stems from the wrongly presumed dominance of Dutch cultural ties and the Dutch language on the six Dutch Caribbean islands. On all islands, Dutch is \- and always has been \- a minority vernacular. The Windward islands Saba, St. Eustatius, and the Dutch part of St. Maarten are primarily Anglophone, whereas in the Leeward islands Aruba, Bonaire, and Curaçao (or: ABC islands), the dominant vernacular is the language known in English as ‘Papiamento.’ With two variations – Papiamentu of Bonaire and Curaçao and Papiamento of Aruba – its origins are still disputed, though it is clear that the parent language of this Creole is West Iberian Romance. Today Papiamento is a rich mixture of Portuguese, Spanish, Upper Guinee Creoles, Native American languages, Dutch, French, and English.

Throughout centuries Papiamento has been considered the primary element of identification and belonging on the islands. As such, it is crucial to education, community work and the arts, implicated in a constant process of discovery and renewal. Papiamento often takes center stage in the cultural praxis of the ABC islands and their diaspora. In theatre or music performances the language is not simply being used but experimented with, enriched and celebrated. As elsewhere in the Caribbean region, Papiamento radio stations and radio programs since the late 1940s have been a crucial outlet and platform for cultural and political information, interaction and expression, producing a rich orality and shaping oral traditions.

With its reach and use surpassing all social and economic categories, Papiamento is a language of resistance but not exclusively the language of the oppressed.[^1] As such it is broadly appreciated in all parts of society but contested and used politically by the elites in a way similar to other Creoles.[^2] Where in Haiti Kreyol was officialized in the constitution of 1987, it took the ABC islands until the 1990s for a process to start establishing Papiamento in policies and education, and even longer to achieve officialization. In the meantime, in these decades, impactful political changes occurred. Today, the islands are all non-sovereign territories within the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The three smaller islands Bonaire, Saba and St. Eustatius are governed as special municipalities from the Netherlands since 2010 and the three larger ones are autonomous countries within the Kingdom: Aruba since 1985, Curaçao, and St. Maarten since 2010\. Officialization of Papiamento in Aruba took place in 2003, followed by Papiamentu in Curaçao and Bonaire in 2007\. After 2010, with the change in governmental structure, the official status of the Papiamentu language in Bonaire ended and it took a very long time again for the language to be recognized here under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (2024).

On the relatively small ABC islands, many challenges surround developments in the area of culture, education and science. The organization of language planning by Aruba, Bonaire, and Curaçao governments has suffered from both changes in political structures, agendas and a continuous lack of funding. Until this day, no effective inter-island cooperation is in place. Structural investments are also undermined by local educators, parents, and students prioritizing a ‘global education’, bringing the local language to the periphery of private conversations and stagnating the development of local educational material.

Looking beyond these grim observations, we also see that cultural peripheries are creative and resilient spaces. As vernacular and as a published language Papiamento has been increasingly productive, especially since the 1930s. Cultural emancipation and educational developments of the 1970s and onward substantially stimulated the formal and creative use of the language, resulting in a wealth of published and recorded sources that could enrich cultural development, education, and research.

The importance of Papiamento as an element of identity formation and belonging substantially influences the digital approaches of the heritage field of the ABC islands today. In the past years, all islands made progress in digitizing access to knowledge and materials, some by building repositories, others by creating tools, adapting pedagogy, and applying for funding, with hard work particularly done by those preparing the soil. Through the efforts of dedicated _aficionados_, major progress has been made to develop tools for Papiamento in the digital, such as the _Banko di Palabra_ as one digital place for all words, and an official wordlist (_Buki di Oro_) released in 2011 under a CC-BY-NC license.[^3]

The perspective for obtaining support for digitalization substantially improved in the past few years. Dutch governmental funding organizations stepped up their game to stimulate and support cultural activities in the Caribbean parts of the Kingdom. These budgets and programmes in part were launched in the context of the formal apologies for the slavery past offered by the Dutch government in 2022 and the Dutch King in 2023 to the ancestors of all enslaved. An intensified focus on colonial heritage and transnational cultural activities with former Dutch colonial territories followed. Within The Netherlands, key heritage partners came to acknowledge, understand and embrace the importance of the intricate cultural connections within all territories of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, including the six islands in the Caribbean.[^4] From a small Caribbean island perspective, this outreach \- as welcome as it is \- also proves challenging. For all parties involved it requires a fundamental change of perspective and triggers uncomfortable but necessary conversations about patterns and implications of inequality.

Within the Caribbean, interestingly, the Dutch islands have often been understood as an anomaly, with their apparent close ties to the Kingdom and focus on Europe.[^5] Though this perception contains elements of truth, it is far from the whole story. Long before the recent turning of tides in The Netherlands, librarians, heritage professionals and archivists from the Dutch Caribbean built relations in the region through organizations such as ACURIL library association, and the CARBICA archives association, and started cooperating with platforms such as the Digital Library of the Caribbean (dLOC) and the Internet Archives.[^6] In these Caribbean networks all share a commitment to employ Digital Humanities as tool to promote inclusivity, cultural democracy, and human rights. Furthermore, on all ABC islands for decades, collections have been developed with a distinct postcolonial focus and ambition to empower. Through community projects, for instance, voices of the marginalized have been recorded on all islands since the 1950s.[^7] From this tradition, the islands have a solid starting point to use Digital Humanities \- in the words of Roopika Risam \- to “reshape the dynamics of cultural power and to reclaim for individuals and communities the humanity that is routinely denied.”[^8]

For this edition of _archipelagos journal_, we invited scholars, heritage workers, and arts and education professionals to reflect on Papiamento as a language and archive that is both vividly alive and seriously under pressure. That there is much to be said about all this in a digital realm – from digitization to critical reflection and innovation – became clear as abstracts and ideas poured into our inboxes. Of all these works, four made this publication, and other work is still in process. So: there is more to come on the Dutch Caribbean Digital and the Papiamento language in the next issues.

In this issue, Curaçaoan scholar, librarian and educator **Mikae la Ribeiro** introduces us to the legacy of Curaçaoan multi-talent Elis Juliana. Known himself for relentlessly bringing a wealth of stories and insights to the community, Juliana foregrounded the importance of Glissant’s right to opacity: the fact of knowledge that not everyone is entitled to know. Looking at his legacy in a digital realm, Ribeiro analyzes Juliana’s multimodal approach to archiving and explores the background and relevance of his archival principles, centering “trusting relationships, respect for modalities of knowledge, and reciprocal knowledge sharing.”

Other authors also elaborate on how colonial power structures have influenced the digital archive and on the consequential ethical considerations and responsibilities. Trinidad historian and digital educator **Debbie McCollins** reviews The Colonial Collections Consortium, an extensive digital archive of objects produced by or acquired in the Dutch colonial world. Her assessment engages with the core dilemma of this transnational hub, as they work with colonial historical material “controlled ultimately by imperial hands” while trying to correct colonial injustices. This aspiration also lies at the heart of the Historical Database of Suriname and the Caribbean, a collective international project presented here by Dutch historian **Björn Quanjer cs**. This project – initiated to make the Suriname and Dutch Caribbean slave registries accessible – is a citizen science project enabling Caribbean communities to participate in data creation that will eventually facilitate the recreation of their ancestry and their transnational histories.

Overcoming archival silences and supporting postcolonial studies is also at the core of two essays on new digital collections. Librarian **Jeanmary Lugo González** presents the Juan Mari Brás Collection, a digital archive curated by the Juan Mari Brás Foundation with support from the University of Puerto Rico (UPR). The “Hidden collections” project aims at giving lesser-known collection items visibility, thereby furthering their use. Aruban scholar **Jan Bant cs** records work done with the Internet Archives for a collective of Aruban heritage institutes that has worked toward facilitating the availability of digital sources, including a rich corpus in Papiamento. Here, too, much effort is made to present material in ways that speak to the communities being served, by providing a Papiamento interface and Papiamento search tools and finding aids.

I am deeply grateful and indebted to the authors, the reviewers, and the brilliant editorial team at _Archipelagos_ for their contributions to this issue. I can only hope this will mark the beginning of a robust and sustained integration of the ABC into the realm of the Caribbean digital. We have delved into uncharted yet familiar territories, and we promise the readers of this issue an illuminating journey.

[^1]: Joyce Pereira and Luc Alofs, ‘Papiamento: An Official Caribbean Creole Language from Legal Repression to Full Recognition’, _Caribbean Cultural Heritage and the Nation: Aruba, Bonaire and Curaçao in a Regional Context_ 4 (2023): 137\. [https://scholarlypublications.universiteitleiden.nl/handle/1887/3629949](https://scholarlypublications.universiteitleiden.nl/handle/1887/3629949)
[^2]: Philipp Krämer, Eric Mijts, and Angela Bartens, ‘Language Making of Creoles in Multilingual Postcolonial Societies’, _International Journal of the Sociology of Language_ 2022, no. 274 (1 March 2022): 51–82, https://doi.org/10.1515/ijsl-2021-0018.
[^3]: Ronald Severing et al., ‘Towards a Language Database of Papiamentu’, 2014, 97–104.
[^4]: About the historical background \[in Dutch\]: Margo Groenewoud, ‘De Digitale Toekomst van Caribisch Erfgoed in Het Koninkrijk’, in _Antilliaans Erfgoed._, ed. Gert Oostindie and Alex Stipriaan van, vol. II. Nu en verder (Leiden: Leiden University Press, 2021), 233–52.
[^5]: Margo Groenewoud, ‘Decolonization, Otherness, and the Neglect of the Dutch Caribbean in Caribbean Studies’, _Small Axe: A Caribbean Journal of Criticism_ 64 (2021): 102–15.
[^6]: Margo Groenewoud, ‘Epiloog: de som van de delen.’, in _Cultuur Digitaal: een eerste verkenning in de Cariben_, by Shahaila Winklaar (DEN kennisinstituut cultuur & digitale transformatie, 2024).
[^7]: Margo Groenewoud, ‘Digital Humanities, Social Justice and the Pluricultural Realities of Dutch Caribbean Heritage Archives’, in _Caribbean Cultural Heritage and the Nation. Aruba, Bonaire and Curaçao in a Regional Context_, 2023\. [https://scholarlypublications.universiteitleiden.nl/handle/1887/3629949](https://scholarlypublications.universiteitleiden.nl/handle/1887/3629949)
[^8]: Roopika Risam, _New Digital Worlds: Postcolonial Digital Humanities in Theory, Praxis, and Pedagogy_ (Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University Press, 2019), 143\.
