---
layout: article
section: articles
order: 0
title: 
  "long": "Editors' Intro: The Caribbean Digital"
  "short": "Editor's Intro"
author: 
- name: Kaiama L. Glover
  shortname: Glover
- name: Kelly Baker Josephs
  shortname: Baker
- name: Alex Gil
  shortname: Gil
---


The transformation of the academy by the digital revolution presents challenges to customary ways of learning, teaching, conducting research, interpreting documents and presenting findings. It also offers immense opportunities in each of these areas. New media enable oration, graphics, objects, and even embodied performance to supplement existing forms of scholarly production as well as to constitute entirely original platforms. Opportunities for interdisciplinary collaboration have expanded enormously, information has been made more accessible and research made more efficient on multiple levels. We scholars are called upon now, with some urgency, to adapt our investigative and pedagogical methods to an academic climate deluged by a superabundance of information and analysis. This has created opportunities for open-ended and multiform engagements, interactive and continually updating archives and other databases, cartographic applications that enrich places with historical information, and online dialogues with our colleagues and the wider public.

The need for such engagements is especially immediate among the people of the Caribbean and its diasporas. Information technology has become an increasingly significant part of the way that people in the region frame pressing social problems and political aspirations. Aesthetic media like photography and painting - because they are relatively inexpensive and do not rely necessarily on formal training - have become popular among economically dispossessed and politically marginalized constituencies. Moreover, the Internet is analogous in important ways to the Caribbean itself as a dynamic and fluid cultural space: it is generated from disparate places and by disparate peoples; it challenges fundamentally the geographical and physical barriers that disrupt or disallow connection; and it places others and elsewheres in relentless relation. Yet while we celebrate these opportunities for connectedness, we also must make certain that our work in the digital realm undermines and confronts rather than re-inscribes forms of silencing and exclusion in the Caribbean.

These are the possibilities and the preoccupations that animate this special section of our inaugural issue of *sx archipelagos*. The essays included here offer critical perspectives on the digital as praxis and as historicized societal phenomenon. They propose sustained reflections on the challenges and opportunities presented by the media technologies that evermore intensely reconfigure the social and geographic contours of the Caribbean. The majority of the papers were generated out of a broad public conversation initiated in 2014: [The Caribbean Digital I](https://wayback.archive-it.org/1914/20151224034027/http://caribbeandigital.cdrs.columbia.edu/), a conversation to which we returned in 2015 with [The Caribbean Digital II](http://caribbeandigitalnyc.net/2015/), and which we hope to continue far into the future. Over the course of these two events, participants engaged with the so-called digital humanities in the so-called Global South as an ethical, political, social, and creative phenomenon. The essays we have published in this special section of *sx archipelagos* very much illustrate the premises we laid out in these public forums. They are attentive to both the possibilities and the constraints of the technologies they evoke, and they consider the ways in which the Internet does and does not provide structural means for facilitating broad engagement, communication, and accessibility in the Caribbean. 

In "Digitizing the 'Sound Explosions' of Anglophone Caribbean Performance Poetry," Janet Neigh engages questions of archival best practices, audience, and representation in an insightful discussion of Trinidad's youth-led artist collective The 2 Cents Movement. What, Neigh asks, are the costs and the benefits of relying on the digital for the crucial functions of preserving and circulating Caribbean poetry and other forms of oral and performance art? And how does the relatively new performance platform that is the Internet shed light on the politics of preservation and circulation? Similarly, in "Twitter and a Literature of Traces in #douenislands," Jeannine Murray-Romàn considers the ways in which Caribbean artistic movements - in this instance the Trinidad-based Douen Islands Project - embrace digital technology and social media in their efforts to connect with and implicate a wide and diverse audience. Murray-Romàn's "Twitter-focused analysis" explores figurings of the folk - of the *douen* in particular - in both the substance and the practice of reading (in) the Caribbean. Both Neigh and Murray-Romàn affirm the digital as space wherein, despite myriad and significant challenges, artists and/as social actors are able to connect and collaborate transregionally. Also concerned with technology and the arts in the increasingly digitized Caribbean space, Martin Munro interrogates the relationship between music and digital media in "Who Stole the Soul? Race and Rhythm in the Digital Age." Munro considers whether the affordances of technology risks endangering the originary radicalism of black music. Might the digital risk making rhythm accessible to global beat-makers in a troublingly race-and-history-free vacuum?

Tonya Haynes's essay, "Mapping Caribbean Cyberfeminisms," also thinks about expanded opportunities for connection and community-building throughout the (cyber)space of the Caribbean and its diasporas. Focused specifically on the phenomenon of online feminist activism, Haynes situates and critiques the vast network of feminist bloggers whose media presence at once forges new political paths and shores up the work of existing on-the-ground activist communities. Finally, mapping is at the heart of Yarimar Bonilla and Max Hantel's "Visualizing Sovereignty: Cartographic Queries for the Digital Age." Reflecting on the ways in which formal representation is deeply connected to and even determinant of philosophical and political phenomena, Bonilla and Hantel ask how sovereignty in the Caribbean might be generatively reimagined through attention to visualization. From infographics to animation, the authors experiment with cartography as dynamic scholarly praxis through which to challenge existing hierarchies of nationhood.

"The Caribbean Digital" is, of course a complex and unbounded space - one that we have only begun to explore in this special section. It is our hope that this wide-ranging and interdisciplinary collage of interventions will provide a rich point of departure for continued discussion of the political, ethical, and theoretical stakes of the digital in the Americas.